XI
IT I s an unusual experience to waken restfully and slowly, to let the brain climb lazily out of a deep sleep and shake itself and yet have no encounter with the light to guarantee that the sleep is really over. When I awoke I first thought of that, then the scare of blindness came upon me and finally my hand joyously found MacCruiskeen's handkerchief. I tore it off and gazed around. I was still splayed stiffly in my chair. The barrack seemed silent and deserted, the fire was out and the evening sky had the tones of five o'clock. Nests of shadow had already gathered in the corners of the kitchen and in under the table.
￼Feeling stronger and fresher, I stretched forth my legs and braced my arms with exertions of deep chesty strength. I reflected briefly on the immeasurable boon of sleep, more particularly on my own gift of sleeping opportunely. Several times I had gone asleep when my brain could no longer bear the situations it was faced with. This was the opposite of a weakness which haunted no less a man than de Selby. He, for all his greatness, frequently fell asleep for no appar- ent reason in the middle of everyday life, often even in the middle of a sentence.1
￼1 Le Fournier, the conservative French commentator (in his De Selby —Lieu ou Homme?) has written exhaustively on the non-scientific aspects of de Seiby's personality and has noticed several failings and weaknesses difficult to reconcile with his dignity and eminence as a physicist, ballistician, philosopher and psychologist. Though he did not recognise sleep as such, preferring to regard the phenomenon as a series of ' fits ' and heart-attacks, his habit of falling asleep in public earned for him the enmity of several scientific brains of the inferior calibre. These sleeps took place when walking in crowded thorough-
￼fares, at meals and on at least one occasion in a public lavatory. (Du
166
￼Garbandier has given this latter incident malignant publicity in his pseudo-scientific ' redaction ' of the police court proceedings to which he added a virulent preface assailing the savant's moral character in terms which, however intemperate, admit of no ambiguity.) It is true that some of these sleeps occurred without warning at meetings of learned societies when the physicist had been asked to state his views
￼￼
I arose and stretched my legs up and down the floor.
From my chair by the fire I had noticed idly that the front wheel of a bicycle was protruding into view in the passage leading to the rear of the barrack. It was not until I sat down again on the chair after exercising for a quarter of an hour that I found myself staring at this wheel in some sur- prise. I could have sworn it had moved out farther in the interval because three-quarters of it was now visible whereas I could not see the hub the last time. Possibly it was an illu- sion due to an altered position between my two sittings but this was quite unlikely because the chair was small and would not permit of much variation of seat if there was any question of studying comfort. My surprise began to mount to astonishment.
￼I was on my feet again at once and had reached the passage in four long steps. A cry of amazement—now almost a habit with me—escaped from my lips as I looked around. MacCruiskeen in his haste had left: the door of the cell wide open with the ring of keys hanging idly in the lock. In the back of the small cell was a collection of paint-cans, old
￼￼on some abstruse problem but there is no inference, pace du Gar- bandier, that they were'' extremely opportune '.
￼Another of de Selby's weaknesses was his inability to distinguish between men and women. After the famous occasion when the Countess Schnapper had been presented to him (her Glauben ueber Ueberalls is still read) he made flattering references to ' that man ',
￼' that cultured old gentleman', ' crafty old boy' and so on. The age,
dealing with doubtful or obscene matter, he produced a pamphlet
I67
￼intellectual attainments and style of dress of the Countess would make this a pardonable error for anybody afflicted with poor sight but it is feared that the same cannot be said of other instances when young shop-girls, waitresses and the like were publicly addressed as ' boys'. In the few references which he ever made to his own mysterious family he called his mother ' a very distinguished gentleman' (Lux Mundi p. 307), ' a man of stern habits ' (ibid, p. 308) and " a man's man ' (Kraus: Briefe, xvii). Du Garbandier (in his extraordinary Histoire de Notre Temps) has seized on this pathetic shortcoming to outstep, not the prudent limits of scientific commentary but all known horizons of human decency. Taking advantage of the laxity of French law in
￼￼masquerading as a scientific treatise on sexual idiosyncracy in which de Selby is arraigned by name as the most abandoned of all human monsters.
￼Henderson and several lesser authorities on the Hatchjaw-Bassett school have taken the appearance of this regrettable document as the
￼￼
ledgers, punctured bicycle tubes, tyre repair outfits and a
mass of peculiar brass and leather articles not unlike orna- mental horse harness but clearly intended for some wholly different office. The front of the cell was where my atten- tion was. Leaning half-way across the lintel was the Ser- geant's bicycle. Clearly it could not have been put there by MacCruiskeen because he had returned instantly from the cell with his can of paint and his forgotten keys were proof that he had not gone back there before he rode away. During my absence in my sleep it is unlikely that any intruder would have come in merely to move the bicycle half-way out of where it was. On the other hand I could not help recalling what the Sergeant had told me about his fears for his bicycle and his decision to keep it in solitary confinement. If there is good reason for locking a bicycle in a cell like a danger- ous criminal, I reflected, it is fair enough to think that it will try to escape if given the opportunity. I did not quite believe this and I thought it was better to stop thinking about the mystery before I was compelled to believe it because if a man is alone in a house with a bicycle which he thinks is
￼￼proximate cause of Hatchjaw's precipitate departure for Germany. It is now commonly accepted that Hatchjaw was convinced that the name ' du Garbandier' was merely a pseudonym adopted for his own ends by the shadowy Kraus. It will be recalled that Bassett took the opposite view, holding that Kraus was a name used by the mordant
￼Frenchman for spreading his slanders in Germany. It may be observed
appearance of a poisonous volume under the name of du Garbandier.
168
￼that neither of these theories is directly supported by the writings of either commentator: du Garbandier is consistently virulent and de- famatory while much of Kraus's work, blemished as it is by his in- accurate attainments in scholarship, is not at all unflattering to de Selby. Hatchjaw seems to take account of this discrepancy in his fare- well letter to his friend Harold Barge (the last he is known to have written) when he states his conviction that Kraus was making a con- siderable fortune by publishing tepid refutations of du Garbandier's broadsides. This suggestion is not without colour because, as he points out, Kraus had extremely elaborate books on the market—some con- taining expensive plates—within an incredibly short time of the
￼￼In such circumstances it is not easy to avoid the conclusion that both books were produced in collaboration if not written by the one hand. Certainly it is significant that the balance of the engagements be- tween Kraus and du Garbandier was unfailingly to the disadvantage of de Selby.
￼Too much credit cannot be given to Hatchjaw for his immediate
￼￼
edging its way along a wall he will run away from it in
fright; and I was by now so occupied with the thought of my escape that I could not afford to be frightened of any- thing which could assist me.
￼The bicycle itself seemed to have some peculiar quality of shape or personality which gave it distinction and import- ance far beyond that usually possessed by such machines. It was extremely well-kept with a pleasing lustre on its dark- green bars and oil-bath and a clean sparkle on the rustless spokes and rims. Resting before me like a tame domestic pony, it seemed unduly small and low in relation to the Ser- geant yet when I measured its height against myself I found it was bigger than any other bicycle that I knew. This was possibly due to the perfect proportion of its parts which combined merely to create a thing of surpassing grace and elegance, transcending all standards of size and reality and existing only in the absolute validity of its own unexception- able dimensions. Notwithstanding the sturdy cross-bar it seemed ineffably female and fastidious, posing there like a mannequin rather ±an leaning idly like a loafer against the
￼￼and heroic decision to go abroad ' to end once and for all a cancerous corruption which has become an intolerable affront to the decent in- stincts of humanity.' Bassett, in a note delivered at the quay-side at the moment of departure, wished Hatchjaw every success in his under- taking but deplored the fact that he was in the wrong ship, a sly hint that he should direct his steps to Paris rather than to Hamburg. Hatchjaw's friend Harold Barge has left an interesting record of the
￼last interview in the commentator's cabin. ' He seemed nervous and
the nobility of his personality or the peculiar spiritual exaltation
I69
￼out of sorts, striding up and down the tiny floor of his apartment like a caged animal and consulting his watch at least once every five minutes. His conversation was erratic, fragmentary and unrelated to the subjects I was mentioning myself. His lean sunken face, imbued with unnatural pallor, was livened almost to the point of illumination by eyes which burned in his head with a sickly intensity. The rather old- fashioned clothes he wore were creased and dusty and bore every sign of having been worn and slept in for weeks. Any recent attempts which he had made at shaving or washing were clearly of the most perfunctory character; indeed, I recall looking with mixed feelings at the sealed port-hole. His disreputable appearance, however, did not detract from
￼￼conferred on his features by his selfless determination to bring to a successful end the desperate task to which he had set his hand. After we had traversed certain light mathematical topics (not, alas, with any degree of dialectical elegance), a silence fell between us. Both of
￼￼
wall, and resting on its prim flawless tyres with irreproach-
able precision, two tiny points of clean contact with the level floor. I passed my hand with unintended tenderness— sensuously, indeed—across the saddle. Inexplicably it re- minded me of a human face, not by any simple resemblance of shape or feature but by some association of textures, some incomprehensible familiarity at the fingertips. The leather was dark with maturity, hard with a noble hardness and scored with all the sharp lines and finer wrinkles which the years with their tribulations had carved into my own coun- tenance. It was a gentle saddle yet calm and courageous, un- embittered by its confinement and bearing no mark upon it save that of honourable suffering and honest duty. I knew that I liked this bicycle more than I had ever liked any other bicycle, better even than I had liked some people with two legs. I liked her unassuming competence, her docility, the simple dignity of her quiet way. She now seemed to rest beneath my friendly eyes like a tame fowl which will crouch submissively, awaiting with out-hunched wings the caressing hand. Her saddle seemed to spread invitingly into the most
￼￼us, I am sure, had heard the last boat-train (run, as it happened, in two sections on this occasion) draw alongside and felt that the hour of separation could not be long delayed. I was searching in my mind for some inanity of a non-mathematical kind which I could utter to break the tension when he turned to me with a spontaneous and touching
￼gesture of affection, putting a hand which quivered with emotion upon
Soon I found myself stumbling on the quay again with eyes not inno-
170
￼my shoulder. Speaking in a low unsteady voice, he said : " You realise, no doubt, that I am unlikely to return. In destroying the evil things which prevail abroad, I do not exclude my own person from the ambit of the cataclysm which will come and of which I have the components at this moment in my trunk. If I should leave the world the cleaner for my passing and do even a small service to that man whom I love, then I shall measure my joy by the extent to which no trace of either of us will be found after I have faced my adversary. I look to you to take charge of my papers and books and instruments, seeing that they are preserved for those who may come after us." I stammered some reply, taking his proffered hand warmly in my own.
￼￼cent of emotion. Ever since that evening I have felt that there is something sacred and precious in my memory of that lone figure in the small shabby cabin, setting out alone and almost unarmed to pit his slender frame against the snake-like denizen of far-off Hamburg. It is a memory I will always carry with me proudly so long as one breath animates this humble temple.'
￼￼
' enchanting of all seats while her two handlebars, floating
￼finely with the wild grace of alighting wings, beckoned to me to lend my mastery for free and joyful journeyings, lihe lightest of light running in the company of the swift ground- winds to safe havens far away, the whir of the true front wheel in my ear as it spun perfectly beneath my clear eye and the strong fine back wheel with unadmired industry raising gentle dust on the dry roads. How desirable her seat was, how charming the invitation of her slim encircling handle-arms, how unaccountably competent and reassuring her pump resting warmly against her rear thigh!
￼With a start I realised that I had been communing with this strange companion and—not only that—conspiring with her. Both of us were afraid of the same Sergeant, both were awaiting the punishments he would bring with him on his re- turn, both were thinking that this was the last chance to escape beyond his reach; and both knew that the hope of each lay in the other, that we would not succeed unless we went together, assisting each other with sympathy and quiet love.
￼Barge, it is feared, was actuated more by kindly affection for Hatch- jaw than for any concern for historical accuracy when he says that the latter was ' almost unarmed -'. Probably no private traveller has ever gone abroad accompanied by a more formidable armoury and nowhere outside a museum has there been assembled a more varied or deadly collection of lethal engines. Apart from explosive chemicals and the unassembled components of several bombs, grenades and land-
￼mines, he had four army-pattern revolvers, two rook-rifles, angler's
widely remarked at the time, nobody but either Kraus or du Garban-
171
￼landing gear (!), a small machine-gun, several minor firing-irons and an unusual instrument resembling at once a pistol and a shotgun, evidently made to order by a skilled gunsmith and designed to take elephant ball. Wherever he hoped to corner the shadowy Kraus, it is clear that he intended that the ' cataclysm ' should be widespread.
￼The reader who would seek a full account of the undignified fate which awaited the courageous crusader must have recourse to the page of history. Newspaper readers of the older generation will recall the sensational reports of his arrest for impersonating himself, being arraigned at the suit of a man called Olaf (var. Olafsohn) for obtain- ing credit in the name of a world-famous literary ' Gelehrter'. As was
￼￼dier could have engineered so malignant a destiny. (It is noteworthy that du Garbandier, in a reply to a suggestion of this kind made by the usually inoffensive Le Clerque, savagely denied all knowledge of Hatchjaw's whereabouts on the continent but made the peculiar state-
￼￼
The long evening had made its way into the barrack
through the windows, creating mysteries everywhere, erasing the seam between one thing and another, lengthening out the floors and either thinning the air or putting some refine- ment on my ear enabling me to hear for the first time the clicking of a cheap clock from the kitchen.
￼By now the battle would be over, Martin Finnucane and his one-legged men would be stumbling away into the hills with blinded eyes and crazy heads, chattering to each other poor broken words which nobody understood. The Sergeant would now be making his way inexorably through the twi- light homewards, arranging in his head the true story of his day for my amusement before he hanged me. Perhaps Mac- Cruiskeen would remain behind for the present, waiting for the blackest of the night's darkness by some old wall, a wrinkled cigarette in his mouth and his bicycle now draped with sax or seven greatcoats. The deputies would also be going back to where they came from, still wondering why they had been blindfolded to prevent them seeing something wonderful—a miraculous victory with no fighting, nothing
￼￼ment that he had thought for many years that ' a similar impersona- tion ' had been imposed on the gullible public at home many years before there was any question of ' a ridiculous adventure ' abroad, implying apparently that Hatchjaw was not Hatchjaw at all but either another person of the same name or an impostor who had successfully
￼maintained the pretence, in writing and otherwise, for forty years.
brothel-keeper's nark or agent in the lawless dockland fastnesses of
172
￼Small profit can accrue from pursuing so peculiar a suggestion.) The facts of Hatchjaw's original incarceration are not now questioned by any variety of fates after being released. None of these can be regarded as verified fact and many are too absurd to be other than morbid con- jecture. Mainly they are: (i) that he became a convert to the Jewish faith and entered the ministry of that persuasion; (2) that he had resort to petty crime and drug-peddling and spent much of his time in jail; (3) that he was responsible for the notorious 'Munich Letter' incident involving an attempt to use de Selby as the tool of inter- national financial interests; (4) that he returned home in disguise with his reason shattered; and (5) that he was last heard of as a Hamburg
￼￼that maritime cosmopolis. The definitive work on this strange man's life is, of course, that of Henderson but the following will also repay study: Bassett's Recollections, Part vii; The Man Who Sailed Away: A Memoir by H. Barge; Le Clerque's Collected Works, Vol. Ill, pp. 118-287; Peachcroft's Thoughts in a Library and the Hamburg chapter in Goddard's Great Towns.
￼￼
but a bicycle bell ringing madly and the screams of demented
men mixing madly in their darkness.
￼In the next moment I was fumbling for the barrack latch with the Sergeant's willing bicycle in my care. We had travelled the passage and crossed the kitchen with the grace of ballet dancers, silent, swift and faultless in our move- ments, united in the acuteness of our conspiracy. In the country which awaited us outside we stood for a moment undecided, looking into the lowering night and inspecting the dull sameness of the gloom. It was to the left the Ser- geant had gone with MacCruiskeen, to that quarter the next world lay and it was leftwards that all my troubles were. I led the bicycle to the middle of the road, turned her wheel resolutely to the right and swung myself into the centre of her saddle as she moved away eagerly under me in her own time.
￼How can I convey the perfection of my comfort on the bicycle, the completeness of my union with her, the sweet responses she gave me at every particle of her frame? I felt that I had known her for many years and that she had known me and that we understood each other utterly. She moved beneath me with agile sympathy in a swift, airy stride, find- ing smooth ways among the stony tracks, swaying and bend- ing skilfully to match my changing attitudes, even accommo- dating her left pedal patiently to the awkward working of my wooden leg. I sighed and settled forward on her handlebars, counting with a happy heart the trees which stood remotely on the dark roadside, each telling me that I was further and further from the Sergeant.
￼I seemed to cut an unerring course between two sharp shafts of wind which whistled coldly past each ear, fanning my short side hairs. Other winds were moving about in the stillness of the evening, loitering in the trees and moving leaves and grasses to show that the green world was still present in the dark. Water by the roadside, always over- shouted in the roistering day, now performed audibly in its hidings. Flying beetles came against me in their broad loops and circles, whirling blindly against my chest; overhead geese and heavy birds were calling in the middle of a jour- ney. Aloft in the sky I could see the dim tracery of the stars
￼￼173
struggling out here and there between the clouds. And ali
the time she was under me in a flawless racing onwards, touching the road with the lightest touches, surefooted, straight and faultless, each of her metal bars like spear-shafts superbly cast by angels.
￼A thickening of the right-hand night told me that we were approaching the mass of a large house by the road. When we were abreast of it and nearly past it, I recognised it. It was the house of old Mathers, not more than three miles from where my own house was. My heart bounded joyfully. Soon I would see my old friend Divney. We would stand in the bar drinking yellow whiskey, he smoking and listening and I telling him my strange story. If he found any part of it difficult to believe completely I would show him the Ser- geant's bicycle. Then the next day we could both begin again to look for the black cashbox.
￼Some curiosity (or perhaps it was the sense of safety which comes to a man on his own hillside) made me stop pedalling and pull gently at the queenly brake. I had in- tended only to look back at the big house but by accident I had slowed the bicycle so much that she shuddered be- neath me awkwardly, making a gallant effort to remain in motion. Feeling that I had been inconsiderate I jumped quickly from the saddle to relieve her. Then I took a few paces back along the road, eyeing the outline of the house and the shadows of its trees. The gate was open. It seemed a lonely place with no life or breath in it, a dead man's empty house spreading its desolation far into the surround- ing night. Its trees swayed mournfully, gently. I could see the faint glinting of the glass in the big sightless windows and fainter, the sprawl of ivy at the room where the dead man used to sit. I eyed the house up and down, happy that I was near my own people. Suddenly my mind became clouded and confused. I had some memory of seeing the dead man's ghost while in the house searching for the box. It seemed a long time ago now and doubtless was the memory of a bad dream. I had killed Mathers with my spade. He was dead for a long time. My adventures had put a strain upon my mind. I could not now remember clearly what had happened to me during the last few days. I recalled only that
￼￼174
I was fleeing from two monstrous policemen and that I was
now near my home. I did not just then try to remember any- thingelse.
￼I had turned away to go when a feeling came upon me that the house had changed the instant my back was turned. This feeling was so strange and chilling that I stood rooted to the road for several seconds with my hands gripping the bars of the bicycle, wondering painfully whether I should turn my head and look or go resolutely forward on my way. I think I had made up my mind to go and had taken a few faltering steps forward when some influence came upon my eyes and dragged them round till they were again resting upon the house. They opened widely in surprise and once more my startled cry jumped out from me. A bright light was burning in a small window in the upper storey.
￼I stood watching it for a time, fascinated. There was no reason why the house should not be occupied or why a light should not be showing, no reason why the light should frighten me. It seemed to be the ordinary yellow light of an oil lamp and I had seen many stranger things than that— many stranger lights, also—in recent days. Nevertheless I could not persuade myself that there was anything the least usual in what my eyes were looking at. The light had some quality which was wrong, mysterious, alarming.
￼I must have stood there for a long time, watching the light and fingering the reassuring bars of the bicycle which would take me away swiftly at any time I chose to go. Gradu- ally I took strength and courage from her and from other things which were lurking in my mind—the nearness of my own house, the nearer nearness of Courahans, Gillespies, Cavanaghs, and the two Murrays, and not further than a shout away the cottage of big Joe Siddery, the giant black- smith. Perhaps whoever had the light may have found the black box and would yield it willingly to anyone who had suffered so much in search of it as I had. Perhaps it would be wise to knock and see.
￼I laid the bicycle gently against the gate-pier, took some string from my pocket and tied her loosely to the bars of the ironwork; then I walked nervously along the crunching gravel towards the gloom of the porch. I recalled the great
￼￼175
thickness of the walls as my hand searched for the door in
the pitch darkness at the rear of it. I found myself well into the hall before I realised that the door was swinging half- open, idly at the mercy of the wind. I felt a chill come upon me in this bleak open house and thought for a moment of returning to the bicycle. But I did not do so. I found the door and grasped the stiff metal knocker, sending three dull rumbling thuds through the house and out around the dark empty garden. No sound or movement answered me as I stood there in the middle of the silence listening to my heart. No feet came hurrying down the stairs, no door above opening with a flood of lamplight. Again I knocked on the hollow door, got no response and again thought of return- ing to the companionship of my friend who was at the gate. But again I did not do so. I moved farther into the hallway, searched for matches and struck one. The hall was empty with all doors leading from it closed; in a corner of it the wind had huddled a blowing of dead leaves and along the walls was the stain of bitter inblown rain. At the far end I could glimpse the white winding stairway. "The match spluttered in my fingers and went out, leaving me again standing in the dark in indecision, again alone with my heart. At last I summoned all my courage and made up my mind to search the upper storey and finish my business and get back to the bicycle as quickly as possible. I struck an- other match, held it high above my head and marched noisily to the stairs, mounting them with slow heavy foot- falls. I remembered the house well from the night I had spent in it after spending hours searching it for the black box. On the top landing I paused to light another match and gave a loud call to give warning of my approach and awaken anybody who was asleep. The call, when it died away with- out reply, left me still more desolate and alone. I moved for- ward quickly and opened the door of the room nearest me, the room where I thought I once slept. The flickering match showed me that it was empty and had been long unoccupied. The bed was stripped of all its clothes, four chairs were locked together, two up-ended, in a corner and a white sheet was draped over a dressing-table. I slammed the door shut and paused to light another match, listening intently for any
￼￼176
sign that I was watched. I heard nothing at all. Then I went
along the passage throwing open the door of every room to the front of the house. They were all empty, deserted, with no light or sign of light in any of them. Afraid to stand still, I went quickly to all the other rooms, but found them all in the same way and ended by running down the stairs in growing fright and out of the front door. Here I stopped dead in my tracks. The light from the upper window was still streaming out and lying against the dark. The window seemed to be in the centre of the house. Feeling frightened, deluded, cold and bad-tempered I strode back into the hall, up the stairs and looked down the corridor where the doors of affl the rooms to the front of the house were. I had left them all wide open on my first visit yet no light now came from any one of them. I walked the passage quickly to make sure that they had not been closed. They were all still open. 1 stood in the silence for three or four minutes barely breath- ing and making no sound, thinking that perhaps whatever was at work would make some move and show itself. But nothing happened, nothing at all.
￼I then walked into the room which seemed most in the centre of the house and made my way over to the window in the dark, guiding myself with my hands outstretched before me. What I saw from the window startled me painfully. The light was streaming from the window of the room next door on my right-hand side, lying thickly on the misty night air and playing on the dark-green leaves of a tree that stood nearby. I remained watching for a time, leaning weakly on the wall; then I moved backwards, keeping my eyes on the faintly-lighted tree-leaves, walking on my toes and making no sound. Soon I had my back to the rear wall, standing within a yard of the open door and the dim light on the tree still plainly visible to me. Then almost in one bound I was out into the passage and into the next room. I could not have spent more than one quarter of a second in that jump and yet I found the next room dusty and deserted with no life or light in it. Sweat was gathering on my brow, my heart was thumping loudly and the bare wooden iioors seemed to tingle still with the echoing noises my feet had made. I moved to the window and looked out. The yellow light was still lying
￼￼177
on the air and shining on the same tree-leaves but now it was
streaming from the window of the room I had just left. I felt I was standing within three yards of something unspeakably inhuman and diabolical which was using its trick of light to lure me on to something still more horrible.
￼I stopped thinking, closing up my mind with a snap as if it were a box or a book. I had a plan in my head which seemed almost hopelessly difficult, very nearly beyond the extremity of human effort, desperate. It was simply to walk out of the room, down the stairs and out of the house on to the rough solid gravel, down the short drive and back to the company of my bicycle. Tied down there at the gate she seemed infinitely far away as if now in another world.
￼Certain that I would be assailed by some influence and prevented from reaching the hall door alive, I put my hands down with fists doubled at my sides, cast my eyes straight at my feet so that they should not look upon any terrible thing appearing in the dark, and walked steadily out of the room and down the black passage. I reached the stairs with- out mishap, reached the hall and then the door and soon found myself on the gravel feeling very much relieved and surprised. I walked down to the gate and out through it. She was resting where I had left her, leaning demurely against the stone pier; my hand told me that the string was un- strained, just as I had tied it. I passed my hands about her hungrily, knowing that she was still my accomplice in the plot of reaching home unharmed. Something made me turn my head again to the house behind me. The light was still burning peacefully in the same window, for all the world as if there was somebody in the room lying contentedly in bed reading a book. If I had given (or had been able to give) unrestricted rein to either fear or reason I should have turned my back forever on this evil house and rode away there and then upon the bicycle to the friendly home which was waiting for me beyond four bends of the passing road. But there was some other thing interfering with my mind. I could not take my eye from the lighted window and perhaps it was that I could resign myself to going home with no news about the black box so long as something was happening in the house where it was supposed to be. I stood there in the
￼￼178
gloom, my hands gripping the handlebars of the bicycle and
my great perplexity worrying me. I could not decide what was the best thing for me to do.
￼It was by accident that an idea came to me. I was shifting my feet as I often did to ease my bad left leg when I noticed that there was a large loose stone on the ground at my feet. I stooped and picked it up. It was about the size of a bicycle- lamp, smooth and round and easily fired. My heart had again become almost audible at the thought of hurling it through the lighted window and thus provoking to open action who- ever was hiding in the house. If I stood by with the bicycle I could get away quickly. Having had the idea, I knew that I should have no contentment until the stone was fired; no rest would come to me until the unexplainable light had been explained.
￼I left the bicycle and went back up the drive with the stone swinging ponderously in my right hand. I paused under the window, looking up at the shaft of light. I could see some large insect flitting in and out of it. I felt my limbs weakening under me and my whole body becoming ill and faint With apprehension. I glanced at the nearby porch half expecting to glimpse some dreadful apparition watching me covertly from the shadows. I saw nothing but the im- penetrable patch of deeper gloom. I then swung the stone a few times to and fro at the end of my straight arm and lobbed it strongly high into the air. There was a loud smash of glass, the dull thuds of the stone landing and rolling along the wooden floor and at the same time the tinkle of broken glass falling down upon the gravel at my feet. Without wait- ing at all I turned and fled at top speed down the drive until I had again reached and made contact with the bicycle.
￼Nothing happened for a time. Probably it was four or five seconds but it seemed an interminable delay of years. The whole upper half of the glass had been carried away, leaving jagged edges protruding about the sash; the light seemed to stream more clearly through the gaping hole. Sud- denly a shadow appeared, blotting out the light on the Whole left-hand side. The shadow was so incomplete that I could not recognise any part of it but I felt certain it was the shadow of a large being or presence who was standing quite
￼￼179
still at the side of the window and gazing out into the night
to see who had thrown the stone. Then it disappeared, making me realise for the first time what had happened and sending a new and deeper horror down upon me. The cer- tain feeling that something else was going to happen made me afraid to make the smallest move lest I should reveal where I was standing with the bicycle.
￼The developments I expected were not long in coming. I was still gazing at the window when I heard soft sounds behind me. I did not look round. Soon I knew they were the footsteps of a very heavy person who was walking along the grass margin of the road to deaden his approach. Thinking he would pass without seeing me in the dark recess of the gateway, I tried to remain even more still than my original utter immobility. The steps suddenly clattered out on the roadway not six yards away, came up behind me and then stopped. It is no joke to say that my heart nearly stopped also. Every part of me that was behind me—neck, ears, back and head—shrank and quailed painfully before the presence confronting them, each expecting an onslaught of indescrib- able ferocity. Then I heard words.
￼' This is a brave night!'
￼I swung round in amazement. Before me, almost blocking out the night, was an enormous policeman. He looked a policeman from his great size but I could see the dim sign of his buttons suspended straight before my face, tracing out the curvature of his great chest. His face was completely hidden in the dark and nothing was clear to me except his overbearing policemanship, his massive rearing of wide strengthy flesh, his domination and his unimpeachable reality. He dwelt upon my mind so strongly that I felt many times more submissive than afraid. I eyed him weakly, my hands faltering about the bars of the bicycle. I was going to try to make my tongue give some hollow answer to his salutation when he spoke again, his words coming in thick friendly lumps from his hidden face.
￼' Will you follow after me till I have a conversation with you privately,' he said, ' if it was nothing else you have no light on your bicycle and I could take your name and address for the half of that.'
￼180
￼
Before he had finished speaking he had eased off in the
dark like a battleship, swinging his bulk ponderously away the same way as he had come. I found my feet obeying him without question, giving their six steps for every two of his, back along the road past the house. When we were about to pass it he turned sharply into a gap in the hedge and led the way into shrubberies and past the boles of dark for- bidding trees, leading me to a mysterious fastness by the gable of the house where branches and tall growings filled the darkness and flanked us closely on both sides, remind- ing me of my journey to the underground heaven of Sergeant Pluck. In the presence of this man I had stopped wondering or even thinking. I watched the swaying outline of his back in the murk ahead of me and hurried after it as best I could. He said nothing and made no sound save that of the air labouring in his nostrils and the brushing strides of his boots on the grass-tangled ground, soft and rhythmical like a well- wielded scythe laying down a meadow in swaths.
￼He then turned sharply in towards che house and made for a small window which looked to me unusually low and near the ground. He flashed a torch on it, showing me as I peered from behind his black obstuction four panes of dirty glass set in two sashes. As he put his hand out to it I thought he was going to lift the lower sash up but instead of that he swung the whole window outwards on hidden hinges as if it were a door. Then he stooped his head, put out the light and began putting his immense body in through the tiny open- ing. I do not know how he accomplished what did not look possible at all. But he accomplished it quickly, giving no sound except a louder blowing from his nose and the groan- ing for a moment of a boot which had become wedged in some angle. Then he sent the torchlight back at me to show rhe way, revealing nothing of himself except his feet and the knees of his blue official trousers. When I was in, he leaned back an arm and pulled the window shut and then led the way ahead with his torch.
￼The dimensions of the place in which I found myself were most unusual. The ceiling seemed extraordinarily high while the floor was so narrow that it would not have been possible for me to pass the policeman ahead if I had desired
￼￼181
to do so. He opened a tall door and, walking most awk-
wardly half-sideways, led the way along a passage still nar- rower. After passing through another tall door we began to mount an unbelievable square stairs. Each step seemed about a foot in depth, a foot in height and a foot wide. The policeman was walking up them fully sideways like a crab with his face turned still ahead towards the guidance of his torch. We went through another door at the top of the stairs and I found myself in a very surprising apartment. It was slightly wider than the other places and down the middle of it was a table about a foot in width, two yards in length and attached permanently to the floor by two metal legs. There was an oil-lamp on it, an assortment of pens and inks, a number of small boxes and file-covers and a tall ;ar of official gum. There were no chairs to be seen but all around the walls were niches where a man could sit. On the walls themselves were pinned many posters and notices dealing with bulls and dogs and regulations about sheep-dipping and school- going and breaches of the Firearms Act. With the figure of the policeman, who still had his back to me making an entry on some schedule on the far wall, I had no trouble in know- that I was standing in a tiny police station. I looked around again, taking everything in with astonishment. Then I saw that there was a small window set deeply in the left wall and that a cold breeze was blowing in through a gaping hole in the lower pane. I walked over and looked out. The lamplight was shining dimly on the foliage of the same tree and I knew that I was standing, not in Mathers' house, but inside the walls of it. I gave again my surprised cry, supported myself at the table and looked weakly at the back of the policeman. He was carefully blotting the figures he had entered on the paper on the wall. Then he turned round and replaced his pen on the table. I staggered quickly to one of the niches and sat down in a state of complete collapse, my eyes glued on his face and my mouth drying up like a raindrop on a hot pavement. I tried to say something several times but at first my tongue would not respond. At last I stammered out the thought that was blazing in my mind : ' I thought you were dead!' The great fat body in the unliform did not remind me of
￼182
￼
anybody chat I knew but the face at the top of it belonged to
old Mathers. It was not as I had recalled seeing it last whether in my sleep or otherwise, deathly and unchanging; it was now red and gross as if gallons of hot thick blood had been pumped into it. The cheeks were bulging out like two ruddy globes marked here and there with straggles of purple discolouration. The eyes had been charged with unnatural life and glistened like beads in the lamplight. When he answered me it was the voice of Mathers.
￼' That is a nice thing to say,' he said, ' but it is no matter because I thought the same thing about yourself. I do not understand your unexpected corporality after the morning on the scaffold.'
￼' I escaped,' I stammered.
￼He gave me long searching glances.
￼' Are you sure?' he asked.
￼Was I sure? Suddenly I felt horribly ill as if the spinning of the world in the firmament had come against my stomach for the first time, turning it all to bitter curd. My limbs weakened and hung about me helplessly. Each eye fluttered like a bird's wing in its socket and my head throbbed, swell- ing out like a bladder at every surge of blood. I heard the policeman speaking at me again from a great distance.
￼' I am Policeman Fox,' he said, ' and this is my own private police station and I would be glad to have your opinion on it because I have gone to great pains to make it spick and span.'
￼I felt my brains struggling on bravely, tottering, so to speak, to its knees but unwilling to fall completely. I knew that I would be dead if I lost consciousness for one second. I knew that I could never awaken again or hope to under- stand afresh the terrible way in which I was if I lost the chain of the bitter day I had had. I knew that he was not Fox but Mathers. I knew Mathers was dead. I knew that I would have to talk to him and pretend that everything was natural and try perhaps to escape for the last time with my life to the bicycle. I would have given everything I had in the world and every cashbox in it to get at that moment one look at the strong face of John Divney.
￼' It is a nice station,' I muttered,' but why is it inside the
￼￼183
walls of another house?'
' That is a very simple conundrum, I am sure you know the answer of it.'
￼' I don't.'
￼' It is a very rudimentary conundrum in any case. It is fixed this way to save the rates because if it was constructed the same as any other barracks it would be rated as a separ- ate hereditament and your astonishment would be flabber- gasted if I told you what the rates are in the present year.'
￼' What?'
￼' Sixteen and eightpence in the pound with thruppence in the pound for bad yellow water that I would not use and fourpence by your kind leave for technical education. Is it any wonder the country is on its final legs with the farmers crippled and not one in ten with a proper bull-paper? I have eighteen summonses drawn up for nothing else and there will be hell to pay at the next Court. Why had you no light at all, big or small, on your bicycle?'
￼' My lamp was stolen.'
￼' Stolen? I thought so. It is the third theft today and four pumps disappeared on Saturday last. Some people would steal the saddle from underneath you if they thought you would not notice it, it is a lucky thing the tyre cannot be taken off without undoing the wheel. Wait till I take a deposition from you. Give me a description of the article and tell me all and do not omit anything because what may seem unimportant to yourself might well give a wonderful clue to the trained investigator.'
￼I felt sick at heart but the brief conversation had steadied me and I felt sufficiently recovered to take some small in- terest in the question of getting out of this hideous house. The policeman had opened a thick ledger which looked like the half of a longer book which had been sawn in two to fit the narrow table. He put several questions to me about the lamp and wrote down my replies very laboriously in the book, scratching his pen noisily and breathing heavily through his nose, pausing occasionally in his blowing when some letter of the alphabet gave him special difficulty. I sur- veyed him carefully as he sat absorbed in his task of writing. It was beyond all doubt the face of old Mathers but now it
￼￼184
seemed to have a simple childlike quality as if the wrinkles
of a long lifetime, evident enough the first time I looked at him, had been suddenly softened by some benign influence and practically erased. He now looked so innocent and good- natured and so troubled by the writing down of simple words Chat hope began to flicker once again within me. Surveyed coolly, he did not look a very formidable enemy. Perhaps I was dreaming or in the grip of some horrible hallucination. There was much that I did not understand and possibly could never understand to my dying day—the face of old Mathers whom I thought I had buried in a field on so great and fat a body, the ridiculous police station within the walls of another house, the other two monstrous policemen I had escaped from. But at least I was near my own house and the bicycle was waiting at the gate to take me there. Would this man try to stop me if I said I was going home? Did he know anything about the black box?
￼He had now carefully blotted his work and passed the book to me for my signature, proffering the pen by the handle with great politeness. He had covered two pages in a large childish hand. I thought it better not to enter into any discussion on the question of my name and hastily made an intricate scrawl at the bottom of the statement, closed the book and handed it back. Then I said as casually as I could:
￼' I think I will be going now.'
￼He nodded regretfully.
￼' I am sorry I cannot offer you anything,' he said,' because it is a cold night and it would not do you a bit of harm.'
￼My strength and courage had been flowing back into my body and When I heard these words I felt almost completely strong again. There were many things to be thought about but I would not think of them at all until I was secure in my own house. I would go home as soon as possible and on the way I would not put my eye to right or left. I stood up steadily.
￼' Before I go,' I said, ' there is one thing I would like to ask you. There was a black cashbox stolen from me and I have been searching for it for several days. Would you by any chance have any information about it?'
￼The instant I had this said I was sorry I had said it be-
￼￼185
cause if it actually was Mathers brought miraculously back
to life he might connect me with the robbery and the murder of himself and wreak some terrible vengeance. But the policeman only smiled and put a very knowing expression on his face. He sat down on the edge of the very narrow table and drummed upon it with his nails. Then he looked me in the eye. It was the first time he had done so and I was dazzled as if I had accidentally glanced at the sun.
￼' Do you like strawberry jam?' he asked.
￼His stupid question came so unexpectedly that I nodded and gazed at him uncomprehendingly. His smile broadened.
￼' Well if you had that box here,' he said, ' you could have a bucket of strawberry jam for your tea and if that was not enough you could have a bathful of it to lie in it full-length and if that much did not satisfy you, you could have ten acres of land with strawberry jam spread on it to the height of your two oxters. What do you thing of that?'
￼' I do not know what to think of it,' I muttered. ' I do not understand it.'
' I will put it another way,' he said good-humouredly. ' You could have a house packed full of strawberry jam, every room so full that you could not open the door.'
￼I could only shake my head. I was becoming uneasy again.
￼' I would not require all that jam,' I said stupidly.
￼The policeman sighed as if despairing to convey to me his line of thought. Then his expression grew slightly more serious.
￼' Tell me this and tell me no more,' he said solemnly. ' When you went with Pluck and MacCruiskeen that time downstairs in the wood, what was your private opinion of what you saw? Was it your opinion that everything there was more than ordinary?'
￼I started at the mention of the other policemen and felt that I was once more in serious danger. I would have to be extremely careful. I could not see how he knew what had happened to me when I was in the toils of Pluck and Mac- Cruiskeen but I told him that I did not understand the underground paradise and thought that even the smallest thing that happened there was miraculous. Even now when I recalled what I had seen there I wondered once more
￼￼186
whether I had been dreaming. The policeman seemed
pleased at the wonder I had expressed. He was smiling quietly, more to himself than to me.
￼' Like everything that is hard to believe and difficult to comprehend,' he said at last, ' it is very simple and a neigh- bour's child could work it all without being trained. It is a pity you did not think of the strawberry jam While you were there because you could have got a barrel of it free of charge and the quality would be extra and superfine, only the pur- est fruit-juice used and little or no preservatives.'
￼' It did not look simple—what I saw.'
￼' You thought there was magic in it, not to mention monkey-work of no mean order?'
￼' I did.'
￼' But it can all be explained, it was very simple and the way it was all worked will astonish you when I tell you.'
￼Despite my dangerous situation, his words fired me with a keen curiosity. I reflected that this talk of the strange underground region with the doors and wires confirmed that it did exist, that I actually had been there and that my memory of it was not the memory of a dream—unless I was still in the grip of the same nightmare. His offer to explain hundreds of miracles in one simple explanation was very tempting. Even that knowledge might repay me for the un- easiness I felt in his company. The sooner the talking stopped the sooner I could attempt my escape.
￼' How was it done, then?' I asked.
￼The Sergeant smiled broadly in amusement at my puzzled face. He made me feel that I was a child asking about some- thing that was self-evident.
￼' The box,' he said.
￼' The box? My box?'
￼' Of course. The little box did the trick, I have to laugh at Pluck and MacCruiskeen, you would think they had more sense.'
￼' Did you find the box?'
￼' It was found and I entered into complete possession of it in virtue of section 16 of the Act of '87 as extended and amended. I was waiting for you to call for it because I know by my own private and official inquiries that you were the
￼￼187
party that was at the loss of it but my impatience gave in
with your long delay and I sent it to your house today by express bicycle and you will find it there before you when you travel homewards. You are a lucky man to have it be- cause there is nothing so valuable in the whole world and it works like a charm, you could swear it was a question of clockwork. I weighed it and there is more than four ounces in it, enough to make you a man of private means and any- thing else you like to fancy.
￼' Four ounces of what?'
￼' Of omnium. Surely you know what was in your own box?'
￼' Of course,' I stammered, ' but I did not think there was four ounces.'
￼' Four point one two on the Post Office scales. And that is how I worked the fun with Pluck and MacCruiskeen, it would make you smile to think of it, they had to run and work like horses every time I shoved the readings up to danger-point.'
￼He chuckled softly at the thought of Ms colleagues having to do hard work and looked across at me to see the effect of this simple revelation. I sank back on the seat flabbergasted but managed to return a ghostly smile to divert suspicion that I had not known what was in the box. If I could believe him he had been sitting in diis room presiding at four ounces of this inutterable substance, calmly making ribbons of the natural order, inventing intricate and unheard of machinery to delude the other policemen, interfering drastically with time to make them think they had been leading their magical lives for years, bewildering, horrifying and enchanting the whole countryside. I was stupefied and appalled by the modest claim he had made so cheerfully, I could not quite believe it, yet it was the only way the terrible recollections which filled my brain could be explained. I felt again afraid of the policeman but at the same time a wild excitement gripped me to think that this box and what was in it was at this moment resting on the table of my own kitchen. What would Divney do? Would he be angry at finding no money, take this awful omnium for a piece of dirt and throw it out on the manure heap? Formless speculations crowded
￼￼188
in upon me, fantastic fears and hopes, inexpressible fancies,
intoxicating foreshadowing of creations, changes, annihila- tions and God-like interferences. Sitting at home with my box of omnium I could do anything, see anything and know anything with no limit to my powers save that of my own imagination. Perhaps I could use it even to extend my imag- ination. I could destroy, alter and improve the universe at will. I could get rid of John Divney, not brutally, but by giving him ten million pounds to go away. I could write the most unbelievable commentaries on de Selby ever written and publish them in bindings unheard of for their luxury and durability. Fruits and crops surpassing anything ever known would flower on my farm, in earth made inconceiv- ably fertile by unparalleled artificial manures. A leg of flesh and bone yet stronger than iron would appear magically upon my left thigh. I would improve the weather to a standard day of sunny peace with gentle rain at night wash- ing the world to make it fresher and more enchanting to the eye. I would present every poor labourer in the world with a bicycle made of gold, each machine with a saddle made of something as yet uninvented but softer than the softest soft- ness, and I would arrange that a warm gale would blow be- hind every man on every journey, even when two were going in opposite directions on the same road. My sow would far- row twice daily and a man would call immediately offering ten million pounds for each of the piglings, only to be outbid by a second man arriving and offering twenty million. The barrels and bottles in my public house would still be full and inexhaustible no matter how much was drawn out of them. I would bring de Selby himself back to life to converse with me at night and advise me in my sublime undertakings. Every Tuesday I would make myself invisible—
￼' You would not believe the convenience of it,' said the policeman bursting in upon my thoughts, ' it is very handy for taking tine muck off your leggings in the winter.'
￼' Why not use it for preventing the muck getting on your leggings at all?' I asked excitedly. The policeman looked at me in wide-eyed admiration.
￼' By the Hokey I never thought of that,' he said.' You are very intellectual and I am certain that I am nothing but a
￼￼189
gawm.
' Why not use it,' I almost shouted, ' to have no muck anywhere at any time ?'
￼He dropped his eyes and looked very disconsolate.
￼' I am the world's champion gawm/ he murmured.
￼I could not help smiling at him, not, indeed, without some pity. It was clear that he was not the sort of person to be entrusted with the contents of the black box. His oafish underground invention was the product of a mind which fed upon adventure books of small boys, books in which every extravagance was mechanical and lethal and solely con- cerned with bringing about somebody's death in the most elaborate way imaginable. I was lucky to have escaped from his preposterous cellars with my life. At the same time I re- called that I had a small account to settle with Policeman MacCruiskeen and Sergeant Pluck. It was not the fault of these gentlemen that I had not been hanged on the scaffold and prevented from ever recovering the black box. My life had been saved by the policeman in front of me, probably by accident, when he decided to rush up an alarming read- ing on the lever. He deserved some consideration for that. I would probably settle ten million pounds upon him when I had time to consider the matter fully. He looked more a fool than a knave. But MacCruiskeen and Pluck were in a different class. It would probably be possible for me to save time and trouble by adapting the underground machinery to give both of them enough trouble, danger, trepidation, work and inconvenience to make them rue the day they first threatened me. Each of the cabinets could be altered to con- tain, not bicycles and whiskey and matches, but putrescent offals, insupportable smells, unbeholdable corruptions con- taining tangles of gleaming slimy vipers each of them deadly and foul of breath, millions of diseased and decayed mon- sters clawing the inside latches of the ovens to open them and escape, rats with horns walking upside down along the ceiling pipes trailing their leprous tails on the policemen's heads, readings of incalculable perilousness mounting hourly upon the—
￼' But it is a great convenience for boiling eggs,' the police- man put in again, ' if you like them soft you get them soft
￼190
￼
and the hard ones are as hard as iron.'
' I think I will go home,' I said steadily, looking at him almost fiercely. I stood up. He only nodded, took out his torch and swung his leg off the table.
￼' I do not think an egg is nice at all if it is underdone,' he remarked, ' and there is nothing so bad for heartburn and indigestion, yesterday was the first time in my life I got my egg right.'
￼He led the way to the tall narrow door, opened it and passed out before me down the dark stairs, flashing the torch ahead and swinging it politely back to me to show the steps. We made slow progress and remained silent, he sometimes walking sideways and rubbing the more bulging parts of his uniform on the wall. When we reached the window, he opened it and got out into the shrubberies first, holding it up until I had scrambled out beside him. Then he went ahead of me again with his light in long swishing steps through the long grass and undergrowth, saying nothing until we had reached the gap in the hedge and were again standing on the hard roadside. Then he spoke. His voice was strangely diffident, almost apologetic.
￼' There was something I would like to tell you,' he said, ' and I am half-ashamed to tell you because it is a question of principle and I do not like taking personal liberties be- cause where would the world be if we all did that?'
I felt him looking at me in the dark with his mild inquiry. I was puzzled and a little disquieted. I felt he was going to make some further devastating revelation.
￼' What is it?' I asked.
' It is about my little barrack ...' he mumbled. ' Yes?'
￼' I was ashamed of my life of the shabbiness of it and I took the liberty of having it papered the same time as I was doing the hard-boiled egg. It is now very neat and I hope you are not vexed or at any loss over the head of it.'
￼I smiled to myself, feeling relieved, and told him that he was very welcome.
￼' It was a sore temptation,' he continued eagerly to rein- force his case, ' it was not necessary to go to the trouble of taking down the notices off the wall because the wallpaper
￼191
￼
put itself up behind them while you would be saying
nothing.'
￼' That is all right,' I said. ' Good night and thank you.' ' Good-bye to you/ he said, saluting me with his hand, ' and you can be certain I will find the stolen lamp because they cost one and sixpence and you would want to be made of money to keep buying them.'
I watched him withdrawing through the hedge and going back into the tangle of trees and bushes. Soon his torch was only an intermittent flicker between the trunks and at last he disappeared completely. I was again alone upon the road- way. There was no sound to be heard save the languorous stirring of die trees in die gende night air. I gave a sigh of relief and began to walk back towards the gate to get my bicycle.
￼￼192
