DESELBY has some interesting things to say on the subject of houses. A row of houses he regards as a row of necessary evils. The softening and degeneration of the human race he attributes to its progressive predilection for interiors and waning interest in the art of going out and staying there. This in turn he sees as the result of the rise of such pursuits as reading, chess-playing, drinking, marriage and the like, few of which can be satisfactorily conducted in the open. Elsewhere he defines a house as 'a large coffin', 'a warren', and 'a box'. Evidently his main objection was to the confinement of a roof and four walls. He ascribed somewhat far-fetched therapeutic values — chiefly pulmonary — to certain structures of his own design which he called 'habitats', crude drawings of which may still be seen in the pages of the Country Album. These structures were of two kinds, roofless 'houses' and 'houses' without walls. The former had wide open doors and windows with an extremely ungainly superstructure of tarpaulins loosely rolled on spars against bad weather—the whole looking like a foundered sailing-ship erected on a platform of masonry and the last place where one would think of keeping even cattle. The other type of 'habitat' had the conventional slated roof but no walls save one, which was to be erected in the quarter of the prevailing wind; around the other sides were the inevitable tarpaulins loosely wound on rollers sus- pended from the gutters of the roof, the whole structure being surrounded by a diminutive moat or pit bearing some resemblance to military latrines. In the light of present-day theories of housing and hygiene, there can be no doubt that de Selby was much mistaken in these ideas but in his own remote day more than one sick person lost his life in an ill-advised quest for health in these fantastic dwellings. Le Fournier, the reliable French commentator (in De Selby— I'Enigme de I'Occideni) has put forward a curious theory regarding￼these 'habitats'. He suggests that de Selby, when writing the Album, paused to consider some point of difficulty and in the meantime engaged in the absent-minded practice known generally as' doodling', then putting his manuscript away. The next time he took it up he was confronted with a mass of diagrams and drawings which he took to be the plans of a type of dwelling he always had in mind and immediately wrote many pages explaining the sketches.' In no other way,' adds the severe Le Fournier, 'can one explain so regrettable a lapse.'
￼
My recollections of de Selby were prompted by my visit to the home of old Mr Mathers. As I approached it along the road the house appeared to be a fine roomy brick building of uncertain age, two storeys high with a plain porch and eight or nine windows to the front of each floor.

I opened the iron gate and walked as softly as I could up the weed-tufted gravel drive. My mind was strangely empty. I did not feel that I was about to end successfully a plan I had worked unrelentingly at night and day for three years. I felt no glow of pleasure and was unexcited at the prospect of becoming rich. I was occupied only with the mechanical task of finding a black box.

The hall-door was closed and although it was set far back in a very deep porch the wind and rain had whipped a coating of gritty dust against the panels and deep into the crack where the door opened, showing that it had been shut for years. Standing on a derelict flower-bed, I tried to push up the sash of the first window on the left. It yielded to my strength, raspingly and stubbornly. I clambered through the opening and found myself, not at once in a room, but crawl- ing along the deepest window-ledge I have ever seen. When I reached the floor and jumped noisily down upon it, the open window seemed very far away and much too small to have admitted me. The room where I found myself was thick with dust, musty and deserted of all furniture. Spiders had erected great stretchings of their web about the fireplace. I made my way quickly to the hall, threw open the door of the room where the box was and paused on the threshold. It was a dark morning and the weather had stained the windows with blears of grey wash which kept the brightest part of the weak light from coming in. The far corner of the room was a blur of shadow. I had a sudden urge to have done with
my task and be out of this house forever. I walked across the bare boards, knelt down in the corner and passed my hands about the floor in search of the loose board. To my surprise I found it easily. It was about two feet in length and rocked hollowly under my hand. I lifted it up, laid it aside and struck a match. I saw a black metal cash-box nestling dimly in the hole. I put my hand down and crooked a finger into the loose reclining handle but the match sud- denly flickered and went out and the handle of the box, which I had lifted up about an inch slid heavily off my finger. Without stopping to light another match I thrust my hand bodily into the opening and just when it should be closing about the box, something happened.

I cannot hope to describe what it was but it had frightened me very much long before I had understood it even slightly. It was some change which came upon me or upon the room, indescribably subtle, yet momentous, ineffable. It was as if the daylight had changed with unnatural sudden- ness, as if the temperature of the evening had altered greatly in an instant or as if the air had become twice as rare or twice as dense as it had been in the winking of an eye; per- haps all of these and other things happened together for all my senses were bewildered all at once and could give me no explanation. The ringers of my right hand, thrust into the opening in the floor, had closed mechanically, found nothing at all and came up again empty. The box was gone!

I heard a cough behind me, soft and natural yet more dis- turbing than any sound that could ever come upon the human ear. That I did not die of fright was due, I think, to two things, the fact that my senses were already dis- arranged and able to interpret to me only gradually what they had perceived and also the fact that the utterance of the cough seemed to bring with it some more awful altera- tion in everything, just as if it had held the universe stand- still for an instant, suspending the planets in their courses, halting the sun and holding in mid-air any falling thing the earth was pulling towards it. I collapsed weakly from my kneeling backwards into a limp sitting-down upon the floor. Sweat broke upon my brow and my eyes remained open for a long time without a wink, glazed and almost sightless.

In the darkest corner of the room near the window a man was sitting in a chair, eyeing me with a mild but unwavering interest. His hand had crept out across the small table by his side to turn up very slowly an oil-lamp which was standing on it. The oil-lamp had a glass bowl with the wick dimly visible inside it, curling in convolutions like an intestine. There were tea things on the table. The man was old Mathers. He was watching me in silence. He did not move or speak and might have been still dead save for the slight movement of his hand at the lamp, the very gentle screwing of his thumb and forefinger against the wick-wheel. The hand was yellow, the wrinkled skin draped loosely upon the bones. Over the knuckle of his forefinger I could clearly see the loop of a skinny vein.

It is hard to write of such a scene or to convey with known words the feelings which came knocking at my numbed mind. How long we sat there, for instance, looking at one another I do not know. Years or minutes could be swallowed up with equal ease in that indescribable and un- accountable interval. The light of morning vanished from my sight, the dusty floor was like nothingness beneath me and my whole body dissolved away, leaving me existing only in the stupid spellbound gaze that went steadily from where I was to the other corner.

I remember that I noticed several things in a cold mechanical way as if I was sitting there with no worry save to note everything I saw. His face was terrifying but his eyes in the middle of it had a quality of chill and horror which made his other features look to me almost friendly. The skin was like faded parchment with an arrangement of puckers and wrinkles which created between them an ex- pression of fathomless inscrutability. But the eyes were hor- rible. Looking at them I got the feeling that they were not genuine eyes at all but mechanical dummies animated by electricity or the like, with a tiny pinhole in the centre of the' pupil' through which the real eye gazed out secretively and with great coldness. Such a conception, possibly with no foundation at all in fact, disturbed me agonisingly and gave rise in my mind to interminable speculations as to the colour and quality of the real eye and as to whether, indeed, it was real at all or merely another dummy with its pinhole on the same plane as the first one so that the real eye, possibly behind thousands of these absurd disguises, gazed out through a barrel of serried peep-holes. Occasionally the heavy cheese-like lids would drop down slowly with great languor and then rise again. Wrapped loosely around the body was an old wine-coloured dressing-gown.

In my distress I thought to myself that perhaps it was his twin brother but at once I heard someone say: Scarcely. If you look carefully at the left-hand side of his neck you will notice that there is sticking-plaster or a band- age there. His throat and chin are also bandaged.

Forlornly, I looked and saw that this was true. He was the man I had murdered beyond all question. He was sitting on a chair four yards away watching me. He sat stiffly with- out a move as if afraid to hurt the gaping wounds which covered his body. Across my own shoulders a stiffness had spread from my exertions with the spade.

But who had uttered these words? They had not frightened me. They were clearly audible to me yet I knew they did not ring out across the air like the chilling cough of the old man in the chair. They came from deep inside me, from my soul. Never before had I believed or suspected that I had a soul but just then I knew I had. I knew also that my soul was friendly, was my senior in years and was solely concerned for my own welfare. For convenience I called him Joe. I felt a little reassured to know that I was not altogether alone. Joe was helping me.

I will not try to tell of the space of time which followed. In the terrible situation I found myself, my reason could give me no assistance. I knew that old Mathers had been felled by an iron bicycle-pump, hacked to death with a heavy spade and then securely buried in a field. I knew also that the same man was now sitting in the same room with me, watching me in silence. His body was bandaged but his eyes were alive and so was his right hand and so was all of him. Perhaps the murder by the roadside was a bad dream. There is nothing dreamy about your stiff shoulders. No,
I replied, but a nightmare can be as strenuous physically as
the real thing.

I decided in some crooked way that the best thing to do was to believe What my eyes were looking at rather than to place my trust in a memory. I decided to show unconcern, to talk to the old man and to test his own reality by asking about the black box which was responsible, if anything could be, for each of us being the way we were. I made up my mind to be bold because I knew that I was in great danger. I knew that I would go mad unless I got up from the floor and moved and talked and behaved in as ordinary a way as possible. I looked away from old Mathers, got carefully to my feet and sat down on a chair that was not far away from him. Then I looked back at him, my heart pausing for a time and working on again with slow heavy hammer-blows which seemed to make my whole frame shudder. He had remained perfectly still but the live right hand had gripped the pot of tea, raised it very awkwardly and slapped a filling into the empty cup. His eyes had followed me to my new posi- tion and were now regarding me again with the same un- wavering languorous interest.
￼Suddenly I began to talk. Words spilled out of me as if they were produced by machinery. My voice, tremulous at first, grew hard and loud and filled the whole room. I do not remember what I said at the beginning. I am sure that most of it was meaningless but I was too pleased and reassured at the natural healthy noise of my tongue to be concerned about the words.
￼Old Mathers did not move or say anything at first but I was certain that he was listening to me. After a while he began to shake his head and then I was sure I had heard him say No. I became excited at his responses and began to speak carefully. He negatived my inquiry about his health, refused to say where the black box had gone and even denied that it was a dark morning. His voice had a peculiar jarring weight like the hoarse toll of an ancient rusty bell in an ivy- smothered tower. He had said nothing beyond the one word No. His lips hardly moved; I felt sure he had no teeth be- hind them.
￼' Are you dead at present?' I asked.
￼￼26
'Iamnot.'
￼' Do you know where the box is?'
'No.'
￼He made another violent movement with his right arm, slapping hot water into his teapot and pouring forth a little more of the feeble brew into his cup. He then relapsed into his attitude of motionless watching. I pondered for a time.
￼' Do you like weak tea?' I asked.' I do not,' he said.
￼' Do you like tea at all?' I asked,' strong or weak or half- way tea?'
￼' No,' he said.
' Then why do you drink it?'
￼He shook his yellow face from side to side sadly and did not say anything. When he stopped shaking he opened up his mouth and poured the cupful of tea in as one would pour a bucket of milk into a churn at churning-time.
￼Do you notice anything?
￼No, I replied, nothing beyond the eeriness of this house and the man who owns it. He is by no means the best con- versationalist I have met.
￼I found I spoke lightly enough. While speaking inwardly or outwardly or thinking of what to say I felt brave and normal enough. But every time a silence came the horror of my situation descended upon me like a heavy blanket filing upon my head, enveloping and smothering me and making me afraid of death.
￼But do you notice nothing about the way he answers your questions?
￼No.
￼Do you not see that every reply is in the negative? No matter what you ask him he says No.
￼That is true enough, I said, but I do not see where that leads me.
￼Use your imagination.
￼When I brought my whole attention back to old Mathers I thought he was asleep. He sat over his teacup in a more stooped attitude as if he were a rock or part of the wooden chair he sat on, a man completely dead and turned to stone. Over his eyes the limp lids had drooped down, almost clos-
￼27
￼
ing them. His right hand resting on the table lay lifeless and
abandoned. I composed my thoughts and addressed to him a sharp noisy interrogation.
￼' Will you answer a straight question?' I asked. He stirred somewhat, his lids opening slightly.
￼' I will not,' he replied.
￼I saw that this answer was in keeping with Joe's shrewd suggestion. I sat thinking for a moment until I had thought the same thought inside out.
￼' Will you refuse to answer a straight question?' I asked.
￼' I will not,' he replied.
￼This answer pleased me. It meant that my mind had got to grips with his, that I was now almost arguing with him and that we were behaving like two ordinary human beings. I did not understand all the terrible things which had hap- pened to me but I now began to think that I must be mis- taken about them.
￼' Very well,' I said quietly,' Why do you always answer No?'
￼He stirred perceptibly in his chair and filled the teacup up again before he spoke. He seemed to have some difficulty in finding words.
￼' " No " is, generally speaking, a better answer than " Yes ",' he said at last. He seemed to speak eagerly, his words coming out as if they had been imprisoned in his mouth for a thousand years. He seemed relieved that I had found a way to make him speak. I thought he even smiled slightly at me but this was doubtless the trickery of the bad morning light or a mischief worked by the shadows of the lamp. He swallowed a long draught of tea and sat waiting, looking at me with his queer eyes. They were now bright and active and moved about restlessly in their yellow wrinkled sockets.
￼' Do you refuse to tell me why you say that?' I asked.' No,' he said.' When I was a young man I led an un- satisfactory life and devoted most of my time to excesses of one kind or another, my principal weakness being Number One. I was also party to the formation of an artificial manure-ring.'
￼My mind went back at once to John Divney, to the farm
￼28
￼
and the public house and on from that to the horrible after-
noon we had spent on the wet lonely road. As if to inter- rupt my unhappy thoughts I heard Joe's voice again, this time severe:
￼No need to ask him what Number One is, we do not want lurid descriptions of vice or anything at all in that line. Use your imagination. Ask him what all this has to do with Yes and No.
￼' What has that got to do with Yes and No?'
￼' After a time,' said old Mathers disregarding me, " I mercifully perceived the error of my ways and the unhappy destination I would reach unless I mended them. I retired from the world in order to try to comprehend it and to find out why it becomes more unsavoury as the years accumulate on a man's body. What do you think I discovered at the end of my meditations?'
￼I felt pleased again. He was now questioning me.
￼' What?'
￼' That No is a better word than Yes,' he replied.
￼This seemed to leave us where we were, I thought.
￼On the contrary, very far from it. I am beginning to agree with him. There is a lot to be said for No as a General Prin- ciple. Ask him what he means.
￼' What do you mean?' I inquired.
￼' When I was meditating,' said old Mathers,' I took all my sins out and put them on the table, so to speak. I need not tell you it was a big table.'
￼He seemed to give a very dry smile at his own joke. I chuckled to encourage him.
￼' I gave them all a strict examination, weighed them and viewed them from all angles of the compass. I asked myself how I came to commit them, where I was and whom I was with when I came to do them.'
￼This is very wholesome stuff, every word a sermon in it- self. Listen very carefully. Ask him to continue.
￼' Continue,' I said.
￼I confess I felt a click inside me very near my stomach as if Joe had put a finger to his lip and pricked up a pair of limp spaniel ears to make sure that no syllable of the wisdom escaped him. Old Mathers continued talking quietly.
￼￼29
' I discovered,' he said,' that everything you do is in
response to a request or a suggestion made to you by some other party either inside you or outside. Some of these sug- gestions are good and praiseworthy and some of them are undoubtedly delightful. But the majority of them are defin- itely bad and are pretty considerable sins as sins go. Do you understand me?'
￼' Perfectly.'
￼' I would say that the bad ones outnumber the good ones by three to one.'
￼Six to one if you ask me.
￼' I therefore decided to say No henceforth to every sug- gestion, request or inquiry whether inward or outward. It was the only simple formula which was sure and safe. It was difficult to practise at first and often called for heroism but I persevered and hardly ever broke down completely. It is now many years since I said Yes. I have refused more re- quests and negatived more statements than any man living or dead. I have rejected, reneged, disagreed, refused and denied to an extent that is unbelievable.'
￼An excellent and original regime. This is all extremely in- teresting and salutary, every syllable a sermon in itself. Very very wholesome.
￼' Extremely interesting,' I said to old Mathers.
￼' The system leads to peace and contentment,' he said.' People do not trouble to ask you questions if they know the answer is a foregone conclusion. Thoughts which have no chance of succeeding do not take the trouble to come into your head at all.'
￼' You must find it irksome in some ways,' I suggested.' If, for instance, I were to offer you a glass of whiskey . ..'
￼' Such few friends as I have,' he answered,' are usually good enough to arrange such invitations in a way that will enable me to adhere to my system and also accept the whiskey. More than once I have been asked whether I would refuse such things.'
￼' And the answer is still NO?'
￼' Certainly.'
￼Joe said nothing at this stage but I had the feeling that this confession was not to his liking; he seemed to be un-
30
￼
easy inside me. The old man seemed to get somewhat restive
also. He bent over his teacup with abstraction as if he were engaged in accomplishing a sacrament. Then he drank with his hollow throat, making empty noises.
￼A saintly man.
￼I turned to him again, fearing that his fit of talkativeness had passed.
￼'Where is the black box which was under the floor a moment ago?' I asked. I pointed to the opening in the corner. He shook his head and did not say anything.
￼' Do you refuse to tell me?'
￼'No.'
￼' Do you object to my taking it?' 'No.'
'Then where is it?'
￼' What is your name?' he asked sharply.
￼I was surprised at this question. It had no bearing on my own conversation but I did not notice its irrelevance because I was shocked to realise that, simple as it was, I could not answer it. I did not know my name, did not remember who I was. I was not certain where I had come from or what my business was in that room. I found I was sure of nothing save my search for the black box. But I knew that the other man's name was Mathers and that he had been killed with a pump and a spade. I had no name.
￼' I have no name,' I replied.
￼' Then how could I tell you where the box was if you could not sign a receipt? That would be most irregular. I might as well give it to the west wind or to the smoke from a pipe. How could you execute an important Bank docu- ment?'
￼' I can always get a name,' I replied.' Doyle or Spaldman is a good name and so is O'Sweeny and Hardiman and O'Gara. I can take my choice. I am not tied down for life to one word like most people.'
￼' I do not care much for Doyle,' he said absently.
￼The name is Ban. Signor Ban, the eminent tenor. Five hundred thousand people crowded the great piazza when the great artist appeared on the balcony of St. Peter's Rome. Fortunately these remarks were not audible in the ordin-
￼31
￼
ary sense of the word. Old Mathers was eyeing me.
' What is your colour?' he asked.
￼' My colour?'
' Surely you know you have a colour?'' People often remark on my red face.'' I do not mean that at all.'
￼Follow this closely, this is bound to be extremely inter- esting. Very edifying also.
￼I saw it was necessary to question old Mathers carefully.
￼' Do you refuse to explain this question about the colours?'
￼' No,' he said. He slapped more tea in his cup.
￼' No doubt you are aware that the winds have colours,' lie said. I thought he settled himself more restfully in his chair and changed his face till it looked a little bit benign.
￼' I never noticed it
￼' A record of this belief will be found in the literature of all ancient peoples.4 There are four winds and eight sub- winds, each with its own colour. The wind from the east is a deep purple, from the south a fine shining silver. The north wind is a hard black and the west is amber. People in the old days had the power of perceiving these colours and could spend a day sitting quietly on a hillside watching the beauty of the winds, their fall and rise and changing hues, the magic of neighbouring winds when they are inter- weaved like ribbons at a wedding. It was a better occupation than gazing at newspapers. The sub-winds had colours of indescribable delicacy, a reddish-yellow half-way between silver and purple, a greyish-green which was related equally to black and brown. What could be more exquisite than a
￼* It is not clear whether de Selby had heard of this but he suggests (Garcia, p. i2) that night, far from being caused by the commonly accepted theory of planetary movements, was due to accumulations of 1 black air' produced by certain volcanic activities of which he does not treat in detail. See also p. 79 and 945, Country Album. Le Fournier's comment (in Homme ou Dieu) is interesting.' On ne saura jamais jusqu'a quel point de Selby fut cause de la Grande Guerre, mais, sans aucun doute, ses theories excentriques—specialement celle que nuit n'est pas un phenomene de nature, mais dans
￼I'atmosphere un etat malsain amene par un industrialisme cupide
32
￼et sans pitie—aurent l'effet de produire un trouble profond dans les masses.'
￼￼
countryside swept lightly by cool rain reddened by the
south-west breeze!'
￼1 Can you see these colours?' I asked.
￼'No.'
￼'You were asking me what my colour was. How do people get their colours?'
' A person's colour,' he answered slowly,' is the colour of the wind prevailing at his birth.'
￼' What is your own colour?'' Light yellow.'
￼' And what is the point of knowing your colour or having a colour at all?'
' For one thing you can tell the length of your life from it. Yellow means a long life and the lighter the better.'
￼This is very edifying, every sentence a sermon in itself. Ask him to explain.
￼' Please explain.'
￼' It is a question of making little gowns,' he said informa- tively.
￼' Little gowns?'
￼'Yes. When I was born there was a certain policeman present who had the gift of wind-watching. The gift is getting very rare these days. Just after I was born he went outside and examined the colour of the wind that was blow- ing across the hill. He had a secret bag with him full of certain materials and bottles and he had tailor's instruments also. He was outside for about ten minutes. When he came in again he had a little gown in his hand and he made my mother put it on me.'
￼'Where did he get this gown?' I asked in surprise.
￼' He made it himself secretly in the backyard, very likely in the cowhouse. It was very thin and slight hike the very finest of spider's muslin. You would not see it at all if you held it against the sky but at certain angles of the light you might at times accidentally notice the edge of it. It was the purest and most perfect manifestation of the outside skin of light yellow. This yellow was the colour of my birth- wind.'
￼' I see,' I said.
￼A very beautiful conception.
￼33
￼
'Every time my birthday came,' old Mathers said,' I was presented with another little gown of the same identical quality except that it was put on over the other one and not in place of it. You may appreciate the extreme delicacy and fineness of the material when I tell you that even at five years old with five of these gowns together on me, I still appeared to be naked. It was, however, an unusual yellowish sort of nakedness. Of course there was no objection to wearing other clothes over the gown. I usually wore an overcoat. But every year I got a new gown.' 'Where did you get them?' I asked. 'From the police. They were brought to my own home until I was big enough to call to the barracks for them.' 'And how does all this enable you to predict your span of life?' 'I will tell you. No matter what your colour is, it will be represented faithfully in your birth-gown. With each year and each gown, the colour will get deeper and more pro- nounced. In my own case I had attained a bright full-blown yellow at fifteen although the colour was so light at birth as to be imperceptible. I am now nearing seventy and the colour is a light brown. As my gowns come to me through the years ahead, the colour will deepen to dark brown, then a dull mahogany and from that ultimately to that very dark sort of brownness one associates usually with stout.''Yes?''In a word the colour gradually deepens gown by gown and year by year until it appears to be black. Finally a day will come when the addition of one further gown will actu- ally achieve real and full blackness. On that day I will die.'

Joe and I were surprised at this. We pondered it in silence, Joe, I thought, seeking to reconcile what he had heard with certain principles he held respecting morality and religion. 'That means,' I said at last, that if you get a number of these gowns and put them all on together, reckoning each as a year of life, you can ascertain the year of your death?' 'Theoretically, yes,' he replied, but there are two difficulties. First of all the police refuse to let you have the gowns together on the ground that the general ascertainment of death-days would be contrary to the public interest. They talk of breaches of the peace and so forth. Secondly, there is a difficulty about stretching.' 'Stretching?' 'Yes. Since you will be wearing as a grown man the tiny gown that fitted you when you were born, it is clear that the gown has stretched until it is perhaps one hundred times as big as it was originally. Naturally this will affect the colour, making it many times rarer than it was. Similarly there will be a proportionate stretch and a corresponding diminution in colour in all the gowns up to manhood—perhaps twenty or so in all.'

wonder whether it can be taken that this accretion of gowns will have become opaque at the incidence of puberty.

I reminded him that there was always an overcoat. 'I take it, then,' I said to old Mathers,' that when you say you can tell the length of life, so to speak, from the colour of your shirt, you mean that you can tell roughly whether you will be long-lived or short-lived?' 'Yes,' he replied.' But if you use your intelligence you can make a very accurate forecast. Naturally some colours are better than others. Some of them, like purple or maroon, are very bad and always mean an early grave. Pink, however, is excellent, and there is a lot to be said for certain shades of green and blue. The prevalence of such colours at birth, however, usually connote a wind that brings bad weather— thunder and lightning, perhaps—and there might be diffi- culties such, for instance, as getting a woman to come in time. As you know, most good things in life are associated with certain disadvantages.' Really very beautiful, everything considered. 'Who-are these policemen?' I asked. 'There is Sergeant Pluck and another man called Mac-Cruiskeen and there is a third man called Fox that disappeared twenty-five years ago and was never heard of after. The first two are down in the barracks and so far as I know they have been there for hundreds of years. They must be operating on a very rare colour, something that ordinary eyes could not see at all. There is no white wind that I know of. They all have the gift of seeing the winds.

A bright thought came to me when I heard of these policemen. If they knew so much they would have no difficulty in telling me where I would find the black box. I began to think I would never be happy until I had that box again in my grip. I looked at old Mathers. He had relapsed again to his former passivity. The light had faded from his eyes and the right hand resting on the table looked quite dead. 'Is the barracks far?' I asked loudly. 'No.' I made up my mind to go there with no delay. Then I noticed a very remarkable thing. The lamplight, which in the beginning had been shining forlornly in the old man's corner only, had now grown rich and yellow and flooded the entire room. The outside light of morning had faded away almost to nothingness. I glanced out of the window and gave a start. Coming into the room I had noticed that the window was to the east and that the sun was rising in that quarter and firing the heavy clouds with light. Now it was setting with last glimmers of feeble red in exactly the same place. It had risen a bit, stopped, and then gone back. Night had come. The policemen would be in bed. I was sure I had fallen among strange people. I made up my mind to go to the barracks the first thing on the morrow. Then I turned again to old Mathers. 'Would you object,' I said to him,' if I went upstairs and occupied one of your beds for the night? It is too late to go home and I think it is going to rain in any case.' 'No,' he said. I left him bent at his teaset and went up the stairs. I had got to like him and thought it was a pity he had been murdered. I felt relieved and simplified and certain that I would soon have the black box. But I would not ask the policemen openly about it at first. I would be crafty. In the morning I would go to the barracks and report the theft of my Ameri- can gold watch. Perhaps it was this lie which was responsible for the bad things that happened to me afterwards. I had no American gold watch.
