I crept out of old Mathers' house nine hours afterwards, making my way on to the firm high-road under the first skies of morning. The dawn was contagious, spreading rapidly about the heavens. Birds were stirring and the great kingly trees were being pleasingly interfered with by the first breezes. My heart was happy and full of zest for high ad- venture. I did not know my name or where I had come from but the black box was practically in my grasp. The police- men would direct me to where it was. Ten thousand pounds' worth of negotiable securities would be a conservative esti- mate of what was in it. As I walked down the road I was pleased enough with everything.
￼The road was narrow, white, old, hard and scarred with shadow. It ran away westwards in the mist of the early morning, running cunningly through the little hills and going to some trouble to visit tiny towns which were not, strictly speaking, on its way. It was possibly one of the oldest roads in the world. I found it hard to think of a time when there was no road there because the trees and the tall hills and the fine views of bogland had been arranged by wise hands for the pleasing picture they made when looked at from the road. Without a road to have them looked at from they would have a somewhat aimless if not a futile aspect.

De Selby has some interesting things to say on the subject of roads. 1 Roads he regards as the most ancient of human monuments, surpassing by many tens of centuries the oldest thing of stone that man has reared to mark his passing. The tread of time, he says, levelling all else, has beaten only to a more enduring hardness the pathways that have been made throughout the world. He mentions in passing a trick the Celts had in ancient times—that of 'throwing a calculation' upon a road. In those days wise men could [1 Golden Hours, vi. 156.] tell to a nicety the dimension of a host which had passed by in the night by looking at their tracks with a certain eye and judging them by their perfection and imperfection, the way each footfall was interfered with by each that came after. In this way they could tell the number of men who had passed, whether they were with horse or heavy with shields and iron weapons, and how many chariots; thus they could say the number of men who should be sent after them to kill them. Elsewhere de Selby makes the point that a good road will have character and a certain air of destiny, an indefinable intimation that it is going somewhere, be it east or west, and not coming back from there. If you go with such a road, he thinks, it will give you pleasant travelling, fine sights at every corner and a gentle ease of peregrination that will persuade you that you are walking forever on falling ground. But if you go east on a road that is on its way west, you will marvel at the unfailing bleakness of every prospect and the great number of sore-footed inclines that confront you to make you tired. If a friendly road should lead you into a complicated city with nets of crooked streets and five hundred other roads leaving it for unknown destinations, your own road will always be discernible for its own self and will lead you safely out of the tangled town.

I walked quietly for a good distance on this road, think- ing my own thoughts with the front part of my brain and at the same time taking pleasure with the back part in the great and widespread finery of the morning. The air was keen, clear, abundant and intoxicating. Its powerful presence could be discerned everywhere, shaking up the green things jauntily, conferring greater dignity and definition on the stones and boulders, forever arranging and re-arranging the clouds and breathing life into the world. The sun had climbed steeply out of his hiding and was now standing be- nignly in the lower sky pouring down floods of enchanting light and preliminary tinglings of heat.

I came upon a stone stile beside a gate leading into a field and sat down to rest upon the top of it. I was not sitting there long until I became surprised; surprising ideas [1 A Memoir of Garcia, p. 27.]
￼￼
were coming into my head from nowhere. First of all I remembered who I was—not my name but where I had come from and who my friends were. I recalled John Divney, my life with him and how we came to wait under the dripping trees on the winter's evening. This led me to reflect in wonder that there was nothing wintry about the morning in which I was now sitting. Furthermore, there was nothing familiar about the good-looking countryside which stretched away from me at every view. I was now but two days from home—not more than three hours' walking—and yet I seemed to have reached regions which I had never seen be- fore and of which I had never even heard. I could not under- stand this because although my life had been spent mostly among my books and papers, I had thought that there was no road in the district I had not travelled, no road whose destination was not well-known to me. There was another thing. My surroundings had a strangeness of a peculiar kind, entirely separate from the mere strangeness of a country where one has never been before. Everything seemed almost too pleasant, too perfect, too finely made. Each thing the eye could see was unmistakable and unambiguous, incap- able of merging with any other thing or of being confused with it. The colour of the bogs was beautiful and the green- ness of the green fields supernal. Trees were arranged here and there with far-from-usual consideration for the fastidi- ous eye. The senses took keen pleasure from merely breath- ing the air and discharged their functions with delight. I was clearly in a strange country but all the doubts and per- plexities which strewed my mind could not stop me from feeling happy and heart-light and full of an appetite for going about my business and finding the hiding-place of the black box. The valuable contents of it, I felt, would secure me for life in my own house and afterwards I could revisit this mysterious townland upon my bicycle and probe at my leisure the reasons for all its strangenesses. I got down from the stile and continued my walk along the road. It was pleasant easeful walking. I felt sure I was not going against the road. It was, so to speak, accompanying me.

Before going to sleep the previous night I had spent a long time in puzzled thought and also in carrying on inward conversations with my newly-found soul. Strangely enough, I was not thinking about the baffling fact that I was enjoying the hospitality of the man I had murdered (or whom I was sure I had murdered) with my spade. I was reflecting about my name and how tantalising it was to have forgotten it. All people have names of one kind or another. Some are arbitrary labels related to the appearance of the person, some represent purely genealogical associations but most of them afford some clue as to the parents of the person named and confer a certain advantage in the execution of legal documents.3 Even a dog has a name which dissociates him from other dogs and indeed my own soul, whom nobody has ever seen on the road or standing at the counter of a public house, had apparently no difficulty in assuming a name which distinguished him from other people's souls.

A thing not easy to account for is the unconcern with which I turned over my various perplexities in my mind. Blank anonymity coming suddenly in the middle of life should be at best alarming, a sharp symptom that the mind is in decay. But the unexplainable exhilaration which I drew from my surroundings seemed to invest this situation merely with the genial interest of a good joke. Even now as I walked along contentedly I sensed a solemn question on this sub- ject from within, one similar to many that had been asked

3 De Selby (Golden Hours, p. 93, et seq.) has put forward an interesting theory on names. Going back to primitive times, he regards the earliest names as crude onomatopaeic associations with the appearance of the person or object named—thus harsh or rough manifestations being represented by far from pleasant gutturalities and vice versa. This idea he pursued to rather fanciful lengths, drawing up elaborate
that de Selby had to open his purse to the tune of five or six hundred
pounds to avert an unsavoury law case.

paradigms of vowels and consonants purporting to correspond to cer- tain indices of human race, colour and temperament and claiming ultimately to be in a position to state the physiological ' group ' of any person merely from a brief study of the letters of his name after the word had been ' rationalised' to allow for variations of language. Certain ' groups' he showed to be universally ' repugnant' to other ' groups '. An unhappy commentary on the theory was furnished by the activities of his own nephew, whether through ignorance or con- tempt for the humanistic researches of his uncle. The nephew set about a Swedish servant, from whom he was completely excluded by the paradigms, in the pantry of a Portsmouth hotel to such purpose
￼￼￼￼
the night before. It was a mocking inquiry. I light-heartedly
gave a list of names which, for all I knew, I might hear:
￼Hugh Murray. Constantin Petrie.
￼Peter Small.
￼Signor Beniamino Bari.
The Honourable Alex O'Brannigan, Bart.
￼Kurt Freund.
￼Mr John P. de Salis, M.A.
￼Dr Solway Garr.
￼Bonaparte Gosworth.
￼Legs O'Hagan.
￼Signor Beniamino Bari, Joe said, the eminent tenor. Three baton-charges outside La Scala at great tenor's premiere. Extraordinary scenes were witnessed outside La Scala Opera House when a crowd of some ten thousand devotees, in- censed by the management's statement that no more stand- ing-room was available, attempted to rush the barriers. Thousands were injured, 79 fatally, in the wild melee. Con- stable Peter Coutts sustained injuries to the groin from which he is unlikely to recover. These scenes were comparable only to the delirium of the fashionable audience inside after Signor Bari had concluded his recital. The great tenor was in admirable voice. Starting with a phase in the lower register with a husky richness which seemed to suggest a cold, he delivered the immortal strains of Che Gelida Manina, favourite aria of the beloved Caruso. As he warmed to his God-like task, note after golden note spilled forth to the remotest corner of the vast theatre, thrilling all and sundry to the inner core. When he reached the high C where heaven and earth seem married in one great climax of exaltation, the audience arose in their seats and cheered as one man, show- ering hats, programmes and chocolate-boxes on the great artist.
￼Thank you very much, I murmured, smiling in wild amusement.
A bit overdone, perhaps, but it is only a hint of the pre- tensions and vanity that you inwardly permit yourself.
￼Indeed?
￼Or what about Dr Solway Garr? The duchess has fainted.
￼￼41
Is there a doctor in the audience? The spare figure, thin
nervous fingers and iron-grey hair, making its way quietly through the pale excited onlookers. A jew brief commands, quietly spoken but imperious. Inside five minutes the situa- tion is well in hand. Wan but smiling, the duchess murmurs her thanks. Expert diagnosis has averted still another tragedy. A small denture has been extracted from the thorax. All hearts go out to the quiet-spoken servant of humanity. His Grace, summoned too late to see aught but the happy ending, is opening his cheque-book and has already marked a thousand guineas on the counterfoil as a small token of his esteem. His cheque is taken but torn to atoms by the smiling medico. A lady in blue at the back of the hall begins to sing O Peace Be Thine and the anthem, growing in volume and sincerity, peals out into the quiet night, leaving few eyes that are dry and hearts that are not replete with yearning ere the last notes fade. Dr Garr only smiles, shaking his head in deprecation.
￼I think that is quite enough, I said.
￼I walked on unperturbed. The sun was maturing rapidly in the east and a great heat had started to spread about the ground like a magic influence, making everything, including my own self, very beautiful and happy in a dreamy drowsy way. The little beds of tender grass here and there by the roadside and the dry sheltery ditches began to look seductive and inviting. The road was being slowly baked to a greater hardness, making my walking more and more laborious. After not long I decided that I must now be near the police barracks and that another rest would fit me better for the task I had on hand. I stopped walking and spread my body out evenly in the shelter of the ditch. The day was brand new and the ditch was feathery. I lay back unstintingly, stunned with the sun. I felt a million little influences in my nostril, hay-smells, grass-smells, odours from distant flowers, the reassuring unmistakability of the abiding earth beneath my head. It was a new and a bright day, the day of the world. Birds piped without limitation and incomparable stripe- coloured bees passed above me on their missions and hardly ever came back the same way home. My eyes were shuttered and my head was buzzing with the spinning of the universe.
￼42
￼
I was not long lying there until my wits deserted me and I
fell far into my sleep. I slept there for a long time, as motionless and as devoid of feeling as the shadow of myself which slept behind me.
￼When I awoke again it was later in the day and a small man was sitting beside me watching me. He was tricky and smoked a tricky pipe and his hand was quavery. His eyes were tricky also, probably from watching policemen. They were very unusual eyes. There was no palpable divergence in their alignment but they seemed to be incapable of giv- ing a direct glance at anything that was straight, whether or not their curious incompatibility was suitable for looking at crooked things. I knew he was watching me only by the way his head was turned; I could not meet his eyes or chal- lenge them. He was small and poorly dressed and on his head was a cloth cap of pale salmon colour. He kept his head in my direction without speaking and I found his presence disquieting. I wondered how long he had been watching me before I awoke.
￼Watch your step here. A very slippery-looking customer.
￼I put my hand into my pocket to see if my wallet was there. It was, smooth and warm like the hand of a good friend. When found that I had not been robbed, I decided to talk to him genially and civilly, see who he was and ask him to direct me to the barracks. I made up my mind not to despise the assistance of anybody who could help me, in however small a way, to find the black box. I gave him the time of day and, so far as I could, a look as intricate as any he could give himself.
￼' More luck to you,' I said.
￼' More power to yourself,' he answered dourly.
￼Ask him his name and occupation and inquire what is his destination.
￼' I do not desire to be inquisitive, sir,' I said, ' but would it be true to mention that you are a bird-catcher?'
￼' Not a bird-catcher,' he answered.
￼' A tinker?'
￼' Not that.'
￼'A man on a journey?'
￼' No, not that.'
￼43
￼
' A fiddler?'
' Not that one.'
I smiled at him in good-humoured perplexity and said:
￼' Tricky-looking man, you are hard to place and it is not easy to guess your station. You seem very contented in one way but then again you do not seem to be satisfied. What is your objection to life?'
￼He blew little bags of smoke at me and looked at me closely from behind the bushes of hair which were growing about his eyes.
￼' Is it life?' he answered. ' I would rather be without it,' he said, ' for there is a queer small utility in it. You cannot eat it or drink it or smoke it in your pipe, it does not keep the rain out and it is a poor armful in the dark if you strip it and take it to bed with you after a night of porter when you are shivering with the red passion. It is a great mistake and a thing better done without, like bed-jars and foreign bacon.'
￼' That is a nice way to be talking on this grand lively day,' I chided, ' when the sun is roaring in the sky and sending great tidings into our weary bones.'
￼' Or like feather-beds,' he continued, ' or bread manu- factured with powerful steam machinery. Is it life you say? Life?'
￼Explain the difficulty of life yet stressing its essential sweetness and desirability.
￼What sweetness?
￼Flowers in the spring, the glory and fulfilment of human life, bird-song at evening—you know very well what I mem. I am not so sure about the sweetness all the same.
￼' It is hard to get the right shape of it,' I said to the tricky man, ' or to define life at all but if you identify life with enjoyment I am told that there is a better brand of it in the cities than in the country parts and there is said to be a very superior brand of it to be had in certain parts of France. Did you ever notice that cats have a lot of it in them when they are quite juveniles?'
￼He was looking in my direction crossly.
￼' Is it life? Many a man has spent a hundred years trying to get the dimensions of it and when he understands it at last
￼44
￼
and entertains the certain pattern of it in his head, by the
hokey he takes to his bed and dies! He dies like a poisoned sheepdog. There is nothing so dangerous, you can't smoke it, nobody will give you tuppence-halfpenny for the half of it and it kills you in the wind-up. It is a queer contraption, very dangerous, a certain death-trap. life?'
￼He sat there looking very vexed with himself and stayed for a while without talking behind a little grey wall he had built for himself by means of his pipe. After an interval I made another attempt to find out what his business was.
￼'Or a man out after rabbits?' I asked.
￼' Not that. Not that.'
￼' A travelling man with a job of journey-work?'
￼'No.'
￼' Driving a steam thrashing-mill?' ' Not for certain.'
￼'Tin-plates?'
￼' No.'
￼'A town clerk?'
￼'No.'
￼' A water-works inspector?'
￼'No.'
￼' With pills for sick horses?' ' Not with pills.'
￼' Then by Dad,' I remarked perplexedly, ' your calling is very unusual and I cannot think of what it is at all, unless you are a farmer like myself, or a publican's assistant or possibly something in the drapery line. Are you an actor or a mummer?'
￼' Not them either.'
￼He sat up suddenly and looked at me in a manner that was almost direct, his pipe sticking out aggressively from his tight jaws. Pie had the world full of smoke. I was uneasy but not altogether afraid of him. If I had my spade with me I knew I would soon make short work of him. I thought the wisest thing to do was to humour him and to agree with everything he said.
￼'lama robber,' 'he said in a dark voice,' a robber with a knife and an arm that's as strong as an article of powerful steam machinery.'
￼￼45
' A robber?' I exclaimed. My forebodings had been borne
out.
￼Steady here. Take no chances.
￼' As strong as the bright moving instruments in a laundry. A black murderer also. Every time I rob a man I knock him dead because I have no respect for life, not a little. If I kill enough men there will be more life to go round and maybe then I will be able to live till I am a thousand and not have the old rattle in my neck when I am quite seventy. Have you a money-bag with you?'
￼Plead poverty and destitution. Ask for the loan of money.
￼That will not be difficult, I answered.
￼' I have no money at all, or coins or sovereigns or bankers' drafts,' I replied, ' no pawn-masters' tickets, nothing that is negotiable or of any value. I am as poor a man as yourself and I was thinking of asking you for two shillings to help me on my way.'
￼I was now more nervous than I was before as I sat look- ing at him. He had put his pipe away and had produced a long farmer's knife. He was looking at the blade of it and flashing lights with it.
￼' Even if you have no money,' he cackled, ' I will take your little life.'
￼' Now look here till I tell you,' I rejoined in a stern voice, ' robbery and murder are against the law and furthermore my life would add little to your own because I have a dis- order in my chest and I am sure to be dead in six months. As well as that, there was a question of a dark funeral in my teacup on Tuesday. Wait till you hear a cough.'
I forced out a great hacking cough. It travelled like a breeze across the grass near at hand. I was now thinking that it might be wise to jump up quickly and run away. It would at least be a simple remedy.
￼' There is another thing about me,' I added, ' part of me is made of wood and has no life in it at all.'
￼The tricky man gave out sharp cries of surprise, jumped up and gave me looks that were too tricky for description. I smiled at him and pulled up my left trouser-leg to show him my timber shin. He examined it closely and ran his hard finger along the edge of it. Then he sat down very quickly,
￼￼46
put his knife away and took out his pipe again. It had been
burning away all the time in his pocket because he started to smoke it without any delay and after a minute he had so much blue smoke made, and grey smoke, that I thought his clothes had gone on fire. Between the smoke I could see that he was giving friendly looks in my direction. After a few moments he spoke cordially and softly to me.
￼' I would not hurt you, little man,' he said.
￼' I think I got the disorder in Mullingar,' I explained. I knew that I had gained his confidence and that the danger of violence was now passed. He then did something which took me by surprise. He pulled up his own ragged trouser and showed me his own left leg. It was smooth, shapely and fairly fat but it was made of wood also.
￼' That is a funny coincidence,' I said. I now perceived the reason for his sudden change of attitude.
￼' You are a sweet man,' he responded, ' and I would not lay a finger on your personality. I am the captain of all the one-legged men in the country. I knew them all up to now except one—your own self—and that one is now also my friend into the same bargain. If any man looks at you side- ways, I will rip his belly.'
￼' That is very friendly talk,' I said.
￼' Wide open,' he said, making a wide movement with his hands.' If you are ever troubled, send for me and I will save you from the woman.'
￼' Women I have no interest in at all,' I said smiling.
￼' A fiddle is a better thing for diversion.'
￼' It does not matter. If your perplexity is an army or a dog, I will come with all the one-legged men and rip the bellies. My real name is Martin Finnucane.'
￼' It is a reasonable name,' I assented.
￼' Martin Finnucane,' he repeated, listening to his own voice as if he were listening to the sweetest music in the world. He lay back and filled himself up to the ears with dark smoke and when he was nearly bursting he let it out again and hid himself in it.
￼' Tell me this,' he said at last. ' Have you a desideratum?'
￼This queer question was unexpected but I answered it quickly enough. I said I had.
￼47
￼
' What desideratum?',
' To find what I am looking for.'
￼' That is a handsome desideratum,' said Martin Finnucane. ' What way will you bring it about or mature its mutandum and bring it ultimately to passable factivity?'
￼' By visiting the police barracks,' I said, ' and asking the policemen to direct me to where it is. Maybe you might in- struct me on how to get to the barrack from where we are now?'
' Maybe indeed,' said Mr Finnucane. ' Have you an ultimatum?'
￼' I have a secret ultimatum,' I replied.
￼' I am sure it is a fine ultimatum,' he said, ' but I will not ask you to recite it for me if you think it is a secret one.'
￼He had smoked away all his tobacco and was now smok- ing the pipe itself, judging by the surly smell of it. He put his hand into a pocket at his crotch and took out a round thing.
' Here is a sovereign for your good luck,' he said, ' the golden token of your golden destiny.'
￼I gave him, so to speak, my golden thank-you but I noticed that the coin he gave me was a bright penny. I put it carefully into my pocket as if it were highly prized and very valuable. I was pleased at the way I had handled this eccentric queerly-spoken brother of the wooden leg. Near the far side of the road was a small river. I stood up and looked at it and watched the white water. It tumbled in the stony bedstead and jumped in the air and hurried excitedly round a corner.
￼' The barracks are on this same road,' said Martin Finnu- cane, ' and I left it behind me a mile away this today morn- ing. You will discover it at the place where the river runs away from the road. If you look now you will see the fat trout in their brown coats coming back from the barracks at this hour because they go there every morning for the fine breakfast that is to be had from the slops and the throwings of the two policemen. But they have their dinners down the other way where a man called MacFeeterson has a bakery shop in a village of houses with their rears to the water. Three bread vans he has and a light dog-cart for the high mountain and he attends at Kilkishkeam on Mondays and Wednesdays.'
￼'Martin Finnucane,' I said, 'a hundred and two difficult thoughts I have to think between this and my destination and the sooner the better.'
￼He sent me up friendly glances from the smokey ditch.
￼'Good-looking man,' he said, 'good luck to your luck and do not entertain danger without sending me cognisance.'
￼I said 'Good-bye, Good-bye' and left him after a hand- shake. I looked back from down the road and saw nothing but the lip of the ditch with smoke coming from it as if tinkers were in the bottom of it cooking their what-they- had. Before I was gone I looked back again and saw the shape of his old head regarding me and closely studying my disappearance. He was amusing and interesting and had helped me by directing me to the barracks and telling me how far it was. And as I went upon my way I was slightly glad that I had met him.
￼A droll customer.
￼￼49
1 Page 82a.
