VII
￼THE SEVERE shock which I encountered soon after re-entry to the barrack with the Sergeant set me thinking afterwards of the immense consolations which philosophy and religion can offer in adversity. They seem to lighten dark places and give strength to bear the unaccustomed load. Not unnaturally my thoughts were never very far from de Selby. All his works—but particularly Golden Hours— I have what one may term a therapeutic quality. They have a heart-lifted effect more usually associated with spirituous liquors, reviving and quietly restoring the spiritual tissue. This benign property of his prose is not, one hopes, to be attributed to the reason noticed by the eccentric du Gar- bandier, who said ' the beauty of reading a page of de SeJby is that it leads one inescapably to the happy conviction that one is not, of all nincompoops, the greatest.'1 This is, I think, an overstatement of one of de Selby's most ingratiat- ing qualities. The humanising urbanity of his work has always seemed to me to be enhanced rather than vitiated by the chance obtrusion here and there of his minor failings, all the more pathetic because he regarded some of them as pinnacles of his intellectual prowess rather than indications of his frailty as a human being.
￼Holding that the usual processes of living were illusory, it is natural that he did not pay much attention to life's ad- versities and he does not in fact offer much suggestion as to how they should be met. Bassett's anecdote2 on this point may be worth recounting. During de Selby's Bartown days he had acquired some local reputation as a savant' due possibly to the fact that he was known never to read news- papers.' A young man in the town was seriously troubled by some question regarding a lady and feeling that this
1' Le Supreme charme qu'on trouve a lire une page de de Selby est
92
￼qu'elle vous conduit inexorablement a l'heureuse certitude que des sots vous n'etes pas le plus grand.'
￼2 In Lux Mundi.
￼￼
matter was weighing on his mind and threatening to inter-
fere with his reason, he sought de Selby for advice. Instead of exorcising this solitary blot from the young man's mind, as indeed could easily have been done, de Selby drew the young man's attention to some fifty imponderable proposi- tions each of which raised difficulties which spanned many eternities and dwarfed the conundrum of the young lady to nothingness. Thus the yoang man who had come fearing the possibility of a bad thing left the house completely convinced of the worst and cheerfully contemplating suicide. That he arrived home for his supper at the usual time was a happy intervention on the part of the moon for he had gone home by the harbour only to find that the tide was two miles out. Six months later he earned for himself six calendar months' incarceration with hard labour on foot of eighteen counts comprising larceny and offences bearing on interference with railroads. So much for the savant as a dispenser of advice.
￼As already said, however, de Selby provides some genuine mental sustenance if read objectively for what there is to read. In the Layman's Atlas8 he deals explicitly with be- reavement, old age, love, sin, death and the other saliencies of existence. It is true that he allows them only some six lines but this is due to his devastating assertion that they are all ' unnecessary'." Astonishing as it may seem, he makes this statement as a direct corollary to his discovery that the earth, far from being a sphere, is ' sausage-shaped.'
￼1 Now very rare and a collector's piece. The sardonic du Garbandier makes great play of the fact that the man who first printed the Atlas (Watkins) was struck by lightning on the day he completed the task. It is interesting to note that the otherwise reliable Hatchjaw has put forward the suggestion that the entire Atlas is spurious and the work of' another hand', raising issues of no less piquancy than those of the Bacon-Shakespeare controversy. He has many ingenious if not quite
￼convincing arguments, not the least of them being that de Selby was
93
￼known to have received considerable royalties from this book which he did not write, ' a procedure that would be of a piece with the master's ethics.' The theory is, however, not one which will commend itself to the serious student.
￼' Du Garbandier has inquired with his customary sarcasm why a malignant condition of the gall-bladder, a disease which frequently reduced de Selby to a cripple, was omitted from the list of ' un- necessaries'.
￼￼
Not a few of the critical commentators confess to a doubt
as to whether de Selby was permitting himself a modicum of unwonted levity in connection with this theory but he seems to argue the matter seriously enough and with no want of conviction.
￼He adopts the customary line of pointing out fallacies in- volved in existing conceptions and then quietly setting up his own design in place of the one he claims to have de- molished.
￼Standing at a point on the postulated spherical earth, he says, one appears to have four main directions in which to move, viz., north, south, east and west. But it does not take much thought to see that there really appear to be only two since north and south are meaningless terms in relation to a spheroid and can connote motion in only one direction; so also with west and east. One can reach any point on the north-south band by travelling in either ' direction', the only apparent difference in the two ' routes' being extran- eous considerations of time and distance, both already shown to be illusory. North-south is therefore one direction and east-west apparently another. Instead of four directions there are only two. It can be safely inferred,5 de Selby says, that there is a further similar fallacy inherent here and that there is in fact only one possible direction properly so- called, because if one leaves any point on the globe, mov- ing and continuing to move in any ' direction ', one ulti- mately reaches the point of departure again.
￼The application of this conclusion to his theory that' the earth is a sausage' is illuminating. He attributes the idea that the earth is spherical to the fact that human beings are continually moving in only one known direction (though convinced that they are free to move in any direction) and that this one direction is really around the circular circum- ference of an earth which is in fact sausage-shaped. It can scarcely be contested that if multi-directionality be ad- mitted to be a fallacy, the sphericity of the earth is another fallacy that would inevitably follow from it. De Selby likens the position of a human on the earth to that of a man on a
￼5 Possibly the one weak spot in the argument. 94
￼￼
tight-wire who must continue walking along the wire or.
perish, being, however, free in all other respects. Move- ment in this restricted orbit results in the permanent hallucination known conventionally as ' life' with its in- numerable concomitant limitations, afflictions and an- omalies. If a way can be found, says de Selby, of discover- ing the * second direction', i.e., along the ' barrel' of the sausage, a world of entirely new sensation and experience will be open to humanity. New and unimaginable dimen- sions will supersede the present order and the manifold ' un- necessaries' of ' one-directional' existence will disappear.
￼It is true that de Selby is rather vague as to how pre- cisely this new direction is to be found. It is not, he warns us, to be ascertained by any microscopic subdivision of the known points of the compass and little can be expected from sudden darts hither and thither in the hope that a happy chance will intervene. He doubts whether human legs would be ' suitable' for traversing the ' longitudinal celestium' and seems to suggest that death is nearly always present when the new direction is discovered. As Bassett points out justly enough, this lends considerable colour to the whole theory but suggests at the same time that de Selby is merely stating in an obscure and recondite way something that is well-known and accepted.
￼As usual, there is evidence that he carried out some private experimenting. He seems to have thought at one time that gravitation was the ' jailer' of humanity, keeping it on the one-directional line of oblivion, and that ultimate freedom lay in some upward direction. He examined avia- tion as a remedy without success and subsequently spent some weeks designing certain ' barometric pumps' which were ' worked with mercury and wires' to clear vast areas of the earth of the influence of gravitation. Happily for the people of the place as well for their movable chattels he does not seem to have had much result. Eventually he was distracted from these occupations by the extraordinary affair of the water-box.8
￼• See Hatchjaw: The De Selby Water-Boxes Day by Day. The cal- culations are given in full and the daily variations are expressed in admirably clear graphs.
￼￼95
As I have already hinted, I would have given much for
a glimpse of a signpost showing the way along the ' barrel' of the sausage after I had been some two minutes back in the white day-room with Sergeant Pluck.
￼We were not more than completely inside the door when we became fully aware that there was a visitor present. He had coloured stripes of high office on his chest but he was dressed in policeman's blue and on his head he carried a policeman's hat with a special badge of superior office glittering very brilliantly in it. He was very fat and circular, with legs and arms of the minimum, and his large bush of moustache was bristling with bad temper and self-indul- gence. The Sergeant gave him looks of surprise and then a military salute.
￼' Inspector O'Corky!' he said.
￼' What is the meaning of the vacuity of the station in routine hours?' barked the Inspector.
￼The sound his voice made was rough like coarse card- board rubbed on sandpaper and it was clear that he was not pleased with himself or with other people.
￼' I was out myself,' the Sergeant replied respectfully, ' on emergency duty and policework of the highest gravity.'
￼' Did you know that a man called Mathers was found in the crotch of a ditch up the road two hours ago with his belly opened up with a knife or sharp instrument?'
￼To say that this was a surprise which interfered seriously with my heart-valves would be the same as saying that a red-hot poker would heat your face if somebody decided to let you have it there. I stared from the Sergeant to the In- spector and back again with my whole inside fluttering in consternation.
￼It seems that our mutual friend Finnucane is in the en- virons, Joe said.
￼' Certainly I did,' said the Sergeant.
￼Very strange. How could he if he has been out with us after the bicycle for the last four hours?
' And what steps have you taken and how many steps?' barked the Inspector.
￼' Long steps and steps in the right direction,' replied the Sergeant evenly. ' I know who the murderer is.'
￼￼96
' Then why is he not arrested into custody?'
' He is,' said the Sergeant pleasantly.
￼'Where?' ' Here.'
￼This was the second thunderbolt. After I had glanced fearfully to my rear without seeing a murderer it became clear to me that I myself was the subject of the private con- versation of the two Policemen. I made no protest because my voice was gone and my mouth was bone-dry.
￼Inspector O'Corky was too angry to be pleased at any- thing so surprising as what the Sergeant said.
￼' Then why is he not confined under a two-way key and padlock in the cell?' he roared.
￼For the first time the Sergeant looked a bit crestfallen and shame-faced. His face got a little redder than it was and he • put his eyes on the stone floor.
￼' To tell you the truth,' lie said at last,' I keep my bicycle there.'
￼' I see,' said the Inspector.
￼He stooped quickly and rammed black clips on the ex- tremities of his trousers and stamped on the floor. For the first time I saw that he had been leaning by one elbow on the counter.
￼' See that you regularise your irregularity instantaneously,' he called as his good-bye,' and set right your irrectitude and put the murderer in the cage before he rips the bag out of the whole countryside.'
￼After that he was gone. Sounds came to us of coarse scraping on the gravel, a sign that the Inspector favoured the old-fashioned method of mounting from the back-step.
￼' Well, now,' the Sergeant said.
￼He took off his cap and went over to a chair and sat on it, easing himself on his broad pneumatic seat. He took a red cloth from his fob and decanted the globes of perspira- tion from his expansive countenance and opened the buttons of his tunic as if to let out on wing the trouble that was imprisoned there. He then took to carrying out a scientific- ally precise examination of the soles and the toes of his constabulary boots, a sign that he was wrestling with some great problem.
￼￼97
' What is your worry?' I inquired, very anxious by now
that what had happened should be discussed.
￼' The bicycle,' he said.
￼'The bicycle?'
' How can I put it out of the cell ?' he asked.
￼' I have always kept it in solitary confinement when I am not riding it to make sure it is not leading a personal life inimical to my own inimitability. I cannot be too care- ful. I have to ride long rides on my constabulary ridings.'
￼' Do you mean that I should be locked in the cell and kept there and hidden from the world?'
￼' You surely heard the instructions of the Inspector?'
￼Ask is it all a joke? Joe said.
￼' Is this all a joke for entertainment purposes?'
￼' If you take it that way I will be indefinitely beholden to you,' said the Sergeant earnestly, ' and I will remember you with real emotion. It would be a noble gesture and an unutterable piece of supreme excellence on the part of the deceased.'
￼' What!' I cried.
￼' You must recollect that to turn everything to your own advantage is one of the regulations of true wisdom as I in- formed you privately. It is the following of this rule on my part that makes you a murderer this today evening.
￼1 The Inspector required a captured prisoner as the least tiniest minimum for his inferior bonhomie and mal d'esprit. It was your personal misfortune to be present adjacently at the time but it was likewise my personal good fortune and good luck. There is no option but to stretch you for the serious offence.'
￼'Stretch me?'
￼' Hang you by the windpipe before high breakfast time.'
￼' That is most unfair,' I stuttered, ' it is unjust. . . rotten . . . fiendish.' My voice rose to a thin tremolo of fear.
￼' It is the way we work in this part of the country,' ex- plained the Sergeant.
￼' I will resist,' I shouted, ' and will resist to the death and fight for my existence even if I lose my life in the attempt.'
￼The Sergeant made a soothing gesture in deprecation.
￼￼98
He took out an enormous pipe and when he stuck it in his
face it looked like a great hatchet.
￼' About the bicycle,' he said when he had it in commis- sion.
￼'What bicycle?'
￼' My own one. Would it inconvenience you if I neglected to bar you into the inside of the cell? I do not desire to be selfish but I have to think carefully about my bicycle. The wall of this day-room is no place for it.'
￼' I do not mind,' I said quietly.
￼1 You can remain in the environs on parole and ticket of leave till we have time to build the high scaffold in the back- yard.'
' How do you know I will not make excellent my escape?' I asked, thinking that it would be better to discover all the thoughts and intentions of the Sergeant so that my escape would in fact be certain.
￼He smiled at me as much as the weight of the pipe would let him.
￼' You will not do that,' he said. ' It would not be honour- able but even if it was we would easily follow the track of your rear tyre and besides the rest of everything Policeman Fox would be sure to apprehend you single-handed on the outskirts. There would be no necessity for a warrant.'
￼Both of us sat silent for a while occupied with our thoughts, he thinking about his bicycle and I about my death.
By the bye, Joe remarked, I seem to remember our friend saying that the law could not lay a finger on us on account of your congenital anonymity.
￼' Quite right,' I said. ' I forgot that.'
￼As things are I fancy it would not be much more than a debating point.
￼' It is worth mentioning,' I said.
￼0 Lord, yes.
￼' By the way,' I said to the Sergeant, ' did you recover my American watch for me?'
￼' The matter is under consideration and is receiving attention,' he said officially.
￼' Do you recall that you told me that I was not here at
￼￼99
all because I had no name and that my personality was in-
visible to the law?'
￼' I said that.'
￼' Then how can I be hanged for a murder, even if I did commit it and there is no trial or preliminary proceed- ings, no caution administered and no hearing before a Com- missioner of the Public Peace?'
￼Watching the Sergeant, I saw him take the hatchet from his jaws in surprise and knot his brows into considerable corrugations. I could see that he was severely troubled with my inquiry. He looked darkly at me and then doubled his look, giving me a compressed stare along the line of his first vision.
￼' Well great cripes!' he said.
￼For three minutes he sat giving my representations his undivided attention. He was frowning so heavily with wrinkles which were so deep that the blood was driven from his face leaving it black and forbidding.
￼Then he spoke.
￼'Are you completely doubtless that you are nameless?' he asked.
￼' Positively certain.'
￼' Would it be Mick Barry?'
￼'No.'
￼' Charlemange O'Keeffe?'
￼'No.'
￼' Sir Justin Spens?'
￼' Not that.'
￼' Kimberley?' 'No.'
' Bernard Farm?' 'No.'
￼' Joseph Poe or Nolan?'
￼'No.'
￼' One of the Garvins or the Moynihans?' ' Not them.'
￼' Rosencranz O'Dowd?' 'No.'
' Would it be O'Benson?'
￼' Not O'Benson.'
￼￼ioo
' The Quigleys, The Mulrooneys or the Hounimen?'
lNo.'
1 The Hardimen or the Merrimen?'
￼' Not them.'
' Peter Dundy?'
￼'No.'
￼' Scratch?'
￼'No.'
￼1 Lord Brad?'
'Not him.'
'The O'Growneys, the O'Roartys or the Finnehys?'
￼'No.'
￼' That is an amazing piece of denial and denunciation,' he said.
￼He passed the red cloth over his face again to reduce the moisture.
￼' An astonishing parade of nullity,' he added.
￼' My name is not Jenkins either,' I vouchsafed.
￼' Roger MacHugh?' ' Not Roger.'
￼' Sitric Hogan?'
￼'No.'
￼'NotConroy?'
￼'No.'
￼' Not O'Conroy?'
￼' Not O'Conroy.'
￼'There are very few more names that you could have, then,' he said. ' Because only a black man could have a name different to the ones I have recited. Or a red man. Not Byrne?'
￼'No.'
￼' Then it is a nice pancake,' he said gloomily. He bent double to give full scope to the extra brains he had at the rear of his head.
￼* Holy suffering senators,' he muttered.
￼/ think we have won the day.
￼We are not home and dried yet, I answered.
￼Nevertheless I think we can relax. Evidently he has never heard of Signor Bari, the golden-throated budgerigar of Milano.
￼IOI
￼
I don't think this is the time for pleasantries.
Or J. Courtney Wain, private investigator and member of the inner bar. Eighteen thousand guineas marked on the brief. The singular case of the red-headed men.
￼' By Scot!' said the Sergeant suddenly. He got up to pace the flooring.
￼' I think the case can be satisfactorily met/ he said pleas- antly, ' and ratified unconditionally.'
￼I did not like his smile and asked him for his explana- tion.
￼' It is true/ he said, ' that you cannot commit a crime and that the right arm of the law cannot lay its finger on you irrespective of the degree of your criminality. Anything you do is a lie and nothing that happens to you is true.'
￼I nodded my agreement comfortably.
￼' For that reason alone,' said the Sergeant, ' we can take you and hang the life out of you and you are not hanged at all and there is no entry to be made in the death papers. The particular death you die is not even a death (which is an inferior phenomenon at the best) only an insanitary ab- straction in the backyard, a piece of negative nullity neutra- lised and rendered void by asphyxiation and the fracture of the spinal string. If it is not a lie to say that you have been given the final hammer behind the barrack, equally it is true to say that nothing has happened to you.'
￼' You mean that because I have no name I cannot die and that you cannot be held answerable for death even if you kill me?'
￼' That is about the size of it,' said the Sergeant.
￼I felt so sad and so entirely disappointed that tears came into my eyes and a lump of incommunicable poignancy swelled tragically in my throat. I began to feel intensely every fragment of my equal humanity. The life that was bubbling at the end of my fingers was real and nearly pain- ful in intensity and so was the beauty of my warm face and the loose humanity of my limbs and the racy health of my red rich blood. To leave it all without good reason and to smash the little empire into small fragments was a thing too pitiful even to refuse to think about.
￼The next important thing that happened in the day-room
￼102
￼
was the entry of Policeman MacCruiskeen. He marched in
to a chair and took out his black notebook and began perus- ing his own autographed memoranda, at the same time twisting his lips into an article like a purse.
￼'Did you take the readings?' the Sergeant asked. ' I did,' MacCruiskeen said.
￼1 Read them till I hear them,' the Sergeant said, ' and until I make mental comparisons inside the interior of my inner head.'
￼MacCruiskeen eyed his book keenly.7 ' Ten point five,' he said.
￼' Ten point five,' said the Sergeant. ' And what was the reading on the beam?'
￼' Five point three.'
￼' And how much on the lever?'
￼' Two point three.'
￼' Two point three is high,' said the Sergeant. He put the back of his fist between the saws of his yellow teeth and commenced working at his mental comparisons. After five minutes his face got clearer and he looked again to Mac- Cruiskeen.
￼' Was there a fall?' he asked. ' A light fall at five-thirty.'
￼'Five-thirty is rather late if the fall was a light one,' he said.' Did you put charcoal adroitly in the vent?'
￼' I did,' said MacCruiskeen.
￼'From a chance and momentary perusual of the Policeman's note- book it is possible for me to give here the relative figures for a week's readings. For obvious reasons the figures themselves are fictitious:
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼PILOT
READING
READING
NATURE OF FALL
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼READING
ON BEAM
ON LEVER
r-25
(>/ any) with time
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼10.2
4-9
Light 4.15
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼10.2
9-5
10.5
12.6
12-5 9-25
4-6 6.a
4-25 7.0
6-5 5-o
'•25 1-7
1-9
3-73 2*5
6.o
103
Light 18.16 Light 7.15 (with lumps)
Nil
Heavy 21.6
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Black 9.0 Black 14.45
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼(with lumps)
￼￼￼￼￼￼
' How much?'
￼' Seven pounds.'
' I would say eight,' said the Sergeant.
￼' Seven was satisfactory enough,' MacCruiskeen said, 'if you recollect that the reading on the beam has been falling for the past four days. I tried the shuttle but there was no trace of play or looseness in it.'
￼' I would still say eight for safety-first,' said the Ser- geant, ' but if the shuttle is tight, there can be no need for timorous anxiety.'
￼' None at all,' said MacCruiskeen.
￼The Sergeant cleared his face of all the lines of thought he had on it and stood up and clapped his flat hands on his breast pockets. ' Well now,' he said.
￼He stooped to put the clips on his ankles.
￼' I must go now to where I am going,' he said, ' and let you,' he said to MacCruiskeen, ' come with me to the ex- terior for two moments till I inform you about recent events officially.'
￼The two of them went out together, leaving me in my sad and cheerless loneliness. MacCruiskeen was not gone for long but I was lonely during that diminutive meantime. When he came in again he gave me a cigarette which was warm and wrinkled from his pocket.
￼* I believe they are going to stretch you,' he said pleas- antly.
￼I replied with nods.
￼' It is a bad time of the year, it will cost a fortune,' he said. ' You would not believe the price of timber.'
￼' Would a tree not suffice?' I inquired, giving tongue to a hollow whim of humour.
' I do not think it would be proper,' he said, ' but I will mention it privately to the Sergeant.'
￼' Thank you.'
￼' The last hanging we had in this parish,' he said, ' was thirty years ago. It was a very famous man called MacDadd. He held the record for the hundred miles on a solid tyre. I need to tell you what the solid tyre did for him. We had to hang the bicycle.'
￼' Hang the bicycle?'
￼￼104
' MacDadd had a first-class grudge against another man
called Figgerson but he did not go near Figgerson. He knew how things stood and gave Figgerson's bicycle a terrible thrashing with a crowbar. After that MacDadd and Figger- son had a fight and Figgerson—a dark man with glasses— did not live to know who the winner was. There was a great wake and he was buried with his bicycle. Did you ever see a bicycle-shaped coffin?'
￼'No.'
￼' It is a very intricate piece of wood-working, you would want to be a first-class carpenter to make a good job of the handlebars to say nothing of the pedals and the back-step. But the murder was a bad piece of criminality and we could not find MacDadd for a long time or make sure where the most of him was. We had to arrest his bicycle as well as himself and we watched the two of them under secret ob- servation for a week to see where the majority of MacDadd was and whether the bicycle was mostly in MacDadd's trousers pan passu if you understand my meaning.'
￼'What happened?'
￼'The Sergeant gave his ruling at the end of the week. His position was painful in the extremity because he was a very close friend of MacDadd after office hours. He con- demned the bicycle and it was the bicycle that was hanged. We entered a nolle prosequi in the day-book in respect of the other defendant. I did not see the stretching myself be- cause I am a delicate man and my stomach is extremely re- actionary.'
￼He got up and went to the dresser and took out his patent music-box which made sounds too esoterically rarefied to be audible to anybody but himself. He then sat back again in his chair, put his hands through the handstraps and began to entertain himself with the music. What he was playing could be roughly inferred from his face. It had a happy broad coarse satisfaction on it, a sign that he was occupied with loud obstreperous barn-songs and gusty shanties of the sea and burly roaring marching-songs. The silence in the room was so unusually quiet that the beginning of it seemed rather loud when the utter stillness of the end of it had been encountered.
￼105
￼
How long this eeriness lasted or how long we were listen-
ing intently to nothing is unknown. My own eyes got tired with inactivity and closed down like a public house at ten o'clock. When they opened again I saw that MacCruiskeen had desisted from the music and was making preparations for mangling his washing and his Sunday shirts. He had pulJed a great rusty mangle from the shadow of the wall and had taken a blanket from the top of it and was screwing down the pressure-spring and spinning the hand wheel and furbishing the machine with expert hands.
￼He went over then to the dresser and took small articles like dry batteries out of a drawer and also an instru- ment like a prongs and glass barrels with wires inside them and other cruder articles resembling the hurricane lamps utilised by the County Council. He put these things into different parts of the mangle and when he had them all satisfactorily adjusted, the mangle looked more like a rough scientific instrument than a machine for wringing out a day's washing.
￼The time of the day was now a dark time, the sun being about to vanish completely in the red west and withdraw all the light. MacCruiskeen kept on adding small well-made articles to his mangle and mounting indescribably delicate glass instruments about the metal legs and on the super- structure. When he had nearly finished this work the room was almost black, and sharp blue sparks would fly some- times from the upside-down of his hand when it was at work.
￼Underneath the mangle in the middle of the cast-iron handiwork I noticed a black box with coloured wires com- ing out of it and there- was a small ticking sound to be heard as if there was a clock in it. All in all it was the most complicated mangle I ever saw and to the inside of a steam thrashing-mill it was not inferior in complexity.
￼Passing near my chair to get an additional accessory, MacCruiskeen saw that I was awake and watching him.
￼' Do not worry if you think it is dark/ he said to me, ' because I am going to light the light and then mangle it for diversion and also for scientific truth.'
￼' Did you say you were going to mangle the light?'
￼106
￼
' Wait till you see now.'
What he did next or which knobs he turned I did not ascertain on account of the gloom but it happened that a queer light appeared somewhere on the mangle. It was a local light that did not extend very much outside its own brightness but it was not a spot of light and still less a bar- shaped light. It was not steady completely but it did not dance like candlelight. It was light of a kind rarely seen in this country and was possibly manufactured with raw materials from abroad. It was a gloomy light and looked exactly as if there was a small area somewhere on the mangle and was merely devoid of darkness.
￼What happened next is astonishing. I could see the dim contours of MacCruiskeen in attendance at the mangle. He made adjustments with his cunning fingers, stooping for a minute to work at the lower-down inventions on the iron work. He rose then to full life-size and started to turn the wheel of the mangle, slowly, sending out a clamping creaki- ness around the barrack. The moment he turned the wheel, the unusual light began to change its appearance and situation in an extremely difficult fashion. With every turn it got brighter and harder and shook with such a fine delicate shaking that it achieved a steadiness unprecedented in the world by defining with its outer shakes the two lateral boundaries of the place where it was incontrovertibly situ- ated. It grew steelier and so intense in its livid pallor that it stained the inner screen of my eyes so that it still confronted me in all quarters when I took my stare far away from the mangle in an effort to preserve my sight. MacCruiskeen kept turning slowly at the handle till suddenly to my sick utter horror, the light seemed to burst and disappear and simultaneously there was a loud shout in the room, a shout which could not have come from a human throat.
￼I sat on the chair's edge and gave frightened looks at the shadow of MacCruiskeen, who was stooping down again at the diminutive scientific accessories of the mangle, making minor adjustments and carrying out running repairs in the dark.
￼' What was that shouting?' I stuttered over at him.
￼'I will tell you that in a tick,' he called, ' if you will in-
￼107
￼
form me what you think the words of the shout were. What
would you say was said in the shout now?'
￼This was a question I was already working with in my own head. The unearthly voice had roared out something very quickly with three or four words compressed into one ragged shout. I could not be sure what it was but several phrases sprang into my head together and each of them could have been the contents of the shout. They bore an eerie resemblance to commonplace shouts I had often heard such as Change for Tinahely and Shillelagh! Two to one the field! Mind the step! Finish him off! I knew, however, that the shout could not be so foolish and trivial because it disturbed me in a way that could only be done by something momentous and diabolical.
￼MacCruiskeen was looking at me with a question in his eye.
￼' I could not make it out,' I said, vaguely and feebly, ' but I think it was railway-station talk.'
￼' I have been listening to shouts and screams for years,' he said,' but I can never surely catch the words. Would you say that he said " Don't press so hard "?'
￼'No.'
' Second favourites always win?'
￼' Not that.'
￼' It is a difficult pancake,' MacCruiskeen said, ' a very compound crux. Wait till we try again.'
￼This time he screwed down the rollers of the mangle till they were whining and till it was nearly out of the question to spin the wheel. The light that appeared was the thinnest and sharpest light that I ever imagined, like the inside of the edge of a sharp razor, and the intensification which came upon it with the turning of the wheel was too delicate a pro- cess to be watched even sideways.
￼What happened eventually was not a shout but a shrill scream, a sound not unlike the call of rats yet far shriller than any sound which could be made by man or animal. Again I thought that words had been used but the exact meaning of them or the language they belonged to was quite uncertain.
￼Two bananas a penny "?'
￼￼108
' Not bananas,' I said.
MacCruiskeen frowned vacantly.
￼' It is one of the most compressed and intricate pancakes I have ever known,' he said.
￼He put the blanket back over the mangle and pushed it to one side and then lit a lamp on the wall by pressing some knob in the darkness. The light was bright but wavery and uncertain and would be far from satisfactory for reading with. He sat back in his chair as if waiting to be questioned and complimented on the strange things he had been doing.
￼'What is your private opinion of all that?' he asked.
￼' What were you doing?' I inquired. ' Stretching the light.'
' I do not understand your meaning.'
￼' I will tell you the size of it,' he said, ' and indicate roughly the shape of it. It is no harm if you know unusual things because you will be a dead man in two days and you will be held incognito and incommunicate in the meantime. Did you ever hear tell of omnium ?'
￼' Omnium?'
￼' Omnium is the right name for it although you will not find it in the books.'
￼' Are you sure that is the right name?' I had never heard this word before except in Latin.
￼' Certain.' 'How certain?'
￼' The Sergeant says so.'
' And what is omnium the right name for?'
￼MacCruiskeen smiled at me indulgently.
￼' You are omnium and I am omnium and so is the mangle and my boots here and so is the wind in the chimney.'
￼' That is enlightening,' I said.
￼' It comes in waves,' he explained.
￼' What colour?'
￼' Every colour.' ' High or low?'
￼' Both.'
￼The blade of my inquisitive curiosity was sharpened but I saw that questions were putting the matter further into doubt instead of clearing it. I kept my silence till Mac-
￼109
￼
Cruiskeen spoke again.
' Some people,' he said, ' call it energy but the right name is omnium because there is far more than energy in the in- side of it, whatever it is. Omnium is the essential inherent interior essence which is hidden inside the root of the kernel of everything and it is always the same.'
￼I nodded wisely.
￼' It never changes. But it shows itself in a million ways and it always comes in waves. Now take the case of the light on the mangle.'
￼1 Take it,' I said.
￼' Light is the same omnium on a short wave but if it comes on a longer wave it is in the form of noise, or sound. With my own patents I can stretch a ray out until it be- comes sound.'
￼' I see.'
￼'And when I have a shout shut in that box with the wires, I can squeeze it till I get heat and you would not be- lieve the convenience of it all in the winter. Do you see that lamp on the wall there?'
￼'Ida'
￼, ' That is operated by a patent compressor and a secret instrument connected with that box with the wires. The box is full of noise. Myself and the Sergeant spend our spare time in the summer collecting noises so that we can have light and heat for our official life in the dark winter. That is why the light is going up and down. Some of the noises are noiser than the others and the pair of us will be blinded if we come to the time when the quarry was work- ing last September. It is in the box somewhere and it is bound to come out of it in the due course inevitably.'
￼' Blasting operations?'
￼' Dynamiteering and extravagant combustions of the most far-reaching kind. But omnium is the business-end of everything. If you could find the right wave that results in a tree, you could make a small fortune out of timber for export.'
￼' And policemen and cows, are they all in wares?'
￼' Everything is on a wave and omnium is at the back of the whole shooting-match unless I am a Dutchman from the
￼110
￼
distant Netherlands. Some people call it God and there are
other names for something that is identically resembling it and that thing is omnium also into the same bargain.'
￼'Cheese?'
￼' Yes. Omnium.' 'Even braces?'
' Even braces.'
￼' Did you ever see a piece of it or what colour it is?'
￼MacCruiskeen smiled wryly and spread his hands into red fans.
￼' That is the supreme pancake,' he said. ' If you could say what the shouts mean it might be the makings of the answer.'
￼'And storm-wind and water and brown bread and the feel of hailstones on the bare head, are those all omnium on a different wave?'
￼'All omnium.'
￼' Could you not get a piece and carry it in your waistcoat so that you could change the world to suit you when it suited you?'
￼' It is the ultimate and the inexorable pancake. If you had a sack of it or even the half-full of a small matchbox of it, you could do anything and even do what could not be described by that name.'
￼' I understand you.'
￼MacCruiskeen sighed and went again to the dresser, tak- ing something from the drawer. When he sat down at the table again, he started to move his hands together, per- forming intricate loops and convolutions with his fingers as if they were knitting something but there were no needles in them at all, nothing to be seen except his naked hands.
￼'Are you working again at the little chest?' I asked. ' I am,' he said.
￼I sat watching him idly, thinking my own thoughts. For the first time I recalled the wherefore of my unhappy visit to the queer situation I was in. Not my watch but the black box. Where was it? If MacCruiskeen knew the answer, would he tell me. if I asked him? If by chance I did not escape safely from the hangman's morning, would I ever see it or know what was inside it, know the value of the
￼111
￼
money I could never spend, know how handsome could
have been my volume on de Selby? Would I ever see John Divney again? Where was he now? Where was my watch?
￼You have no watch.
￼That was true. I felt my brain cluttered and stuffed with questions and blind perplexity and I also felt the sadness of my position coming back into my throat. I felt completely alone, but with a smail hope that I would escape safely at the tail end of everything.
￼I had made up my mind to ask him if he knew anything about the cashbox when my attention was distracted by an- other surprising thing.
The door was flung open and in came Gilhaney, his red face puffed from the rough road. He did not quite stop or sit down but kept moving restlessly about the day-room, paying no attention to me at all. MacCruiskeen had reached a meticulous point in his work and had his head nearly on the table to make sure that his fingers were working cor- rectly and making no serious mistakes. When he had passed the difficulty he looked up somewhat at Gilhaney.
￼* Is it about a bicycle?' he asked casually.
￼' Only about timber,' said Gilhaney.
￼' And what is your timber news?'
￼' The prices have been put up by a Dutch ring, the cost of a good scaffold would cost a fortune.'
￼' Trust the Dutchmen,' MacCruiskeen said in a tone that meant that he knew the timber trade inside out.
￼' A three-man scaffold with a good trap and satisfactory steps would set you back ten pounds without rope or labour,' Gilhaney said.
￼' Ten pounds is a lot of money for a hanger,' said Mac- Cruiskeen.
￼' But a two-man scaffold with a push-off instead of the mechanical trap and a ladder for the steps would cost the best majority of six pound, rope extra.'
￼' And dear at the same price,' said MacCruiskeen.
￼' But the ten-pound scaffold is a better job, there is more class about it,' said Gilhaney. ' There is a charm about a scaffold if it is well-made and satisfactory.'
￼What occurred next I did not see properly because I was
￼112
￼
listening to this pitiless talk even with my eyes. But some-
thing astonishing happened again. Gilhaney had gone near MadCruiskeen to talk down at him seriously and I think he made the mistake of stopping dead completely instead of keeping on the move to preserve his perpendicular balance. The outcome was that he crashed down, half on bent Mac- Cruiskeen and half on the table, bringing the two of them with him into a heap of shouts and legs and confusion on the floor. The policeman's face when I saw it was a frightening sight. It was the colour of a dark plum with passion, but his eyes burned like bonfires in the forehead and there were frothy discharges at his mouth. He said no words for a while, only sounds of jungle anger, wild grunts and clicks of demoniacal hostility. Gilhaney had cowered to the wall and raised himself with the help of it and then retreated to the door. When MacCruiskeen found his tongue again he used the most unclean language ever spoken and invented dirtier words than the dirtiest ever spoken anywhere. He put names on Gilhaney too impossible and revolting to be written with known letters. He was temporarily insane with anger because he rushed ultimately to the dresser where he kept all his properties and pulled out a patent pistol and swept it round the room to threaten the two of us and every breakable article in the house.
￼'Get down on your four knees, the two of you, on the floor,' he roared,' and don't stop searching for that chest you have knocked down till you find it!'
￼Gilhaney slipped down to his knees at once and I did the same thing without troubling to look at the Policeman's face because I could remember distinctly what it looked like the last time I had eyed it. We crawled feebly about the floor, peering and feeling for something that could not be felt or seen and that was really too small to be lost at all.
￼This is amusing. You are going to be hung for murdering a man you did not murder and now you will be shot for not finding a tiny thing that probably does not exist at all and which in any event you did not lose.
￼I deserve it all, I answered, for not being here at all, to quote the words of the Sergeant.
￼How long we remained at our peculiar task, Gilhaney and
￼113
￼
I, it is not easy to remember. Ten minutes or ten years, per-
haps, with MacCruiskeen seated near us, fingering the iron and glaring savagely at our bent forms. Then I caught Gil- haney showing his face to me sideways and giving me a broad private wink. Soon he closed his fingers, got up erect with the assistance of the door-handle and advanced to where MacCruiskeen was, smiling his gappy smile.
￼' Here you are and here it is,' he said with his closed hand outstretched.
￼' Put it on the table,' MacCruiskeen said evenly.
￼Gilhaney put his hand on the table and opened it.
￼' You can now go away and take your departure,' Mac- Cruiskeen told him, ' and leave the premises for the purpose of attending to the timber.'
￼When Gilhaney was gone I saw that most of the passion had ebbed from the Policeman's face. He sat silent for a time, then gave his customary sigh and got up.
￼' I have more to do tonight,' he said to me civilly, ' so I will show you where you are to sleep for the dark night-time.'
￼He lit a queer light that had wires to it and a diminutive box full of minor noises, and led me into a room where there were two white beds and nothing else.
￼' Gilhaney thinks he is a clever one and a master mind,' he said.
￼' He might be or maybe not,' I muttered.
￼' He does not take much account of coincidental chances.' ' He does not look like a man that would care much.'
￼' When he said he had the chest he thought he was mak- ing me into a prize pup and blinding me by putting his thumb in my eye.'
￼' That is what it looked like.'
￼' But by a rare chance he did accidentally close his hand on the chest and it was the chest and nothing else that he re- placed in due course on the table.'
￼There was some silence here.
￼' Which bed?' I asked.
￼' This one,' said MacCruiskeen.
￼￼114
