After MacCruiskeen had tiptoed delicately from the room like a trained nurse and shut the door without a sound, I found myself standing by the bed and wondering stupidly what I was going to do with it. I was weary in body and my brain was numb. I had a curious feeling about my left leg. I thought that it was, so to speak, spreading—that its woodenness was slowly extending throughout my whole body, a dry timber poison killing me inch by inch. Soon my brain would be changed to wood completely and I would then be dead. Even the bed was made of wood, not metal. IfIweretolieinit—
￼Will you sit down for Pity's sake and stop standing there like a gawm, Joe said suddenly.
￼I am not sure what I do next if I stop standing, I answered. But I sat down on the bed for Pity's sake.
￼There is nothing difficult about a bed, even a child can learn to use a bed. Take off your clothes and get into bed and lie on it and keep lying on it even if it makes you feel foolish.
￼I saw the wisdom of this and started to undress. I felt almost too tired to go through that simple task. When all my clothes were laid on the floor they were much more num- erous than I had expected and my body was surprisingly white and thin.
￼I opened the bed fastidiously, lay into the middle of it, closed it up again carefully and let out a sigh of happiness and rest. I felt as if all my weariness and perplexities of the day had descended on me pleasurably like a great heavy quilt which would keep me warm and sleepy. My knees opened up like rosebuds in rich sunlight, pushing my shins two inches further to the bottom of the bed. Every joint be- came loose and foolish and devoid of true utility. Every inch of my person gained weight with every second until the total burden on the bed was approximately five hundred thousand tons. This was evenly distributed on the four wooden legs of the bed, which had by now become an integral part of the universe. My eyelids, each weighing no less than four tons,
slewed ponderously across my eyeballs. My narrow shins, itchier and more remote in their agony of relaxation, moved further away from me till my happy toes pressed closely on the bars. My position was completely horizontal, pon- derous, absolute and incontrovertible. United with the bed I became momentous and planetary. Far away from the bed I could see the outside night framed neatly in the window as if it were a picture on the wall. There was a bright star in one corner with other smaller stars elsewhere littered about in sublime profusion. Lying quietly and dead-eyed, I re- flected on how new the night1 was, how distinctive and un- accustomed its individuality. Robbing me of the reassurance of my eyesight, it was disintegrating my bodily personality into a flux of colour, smell, recollection, desire—all the strange uncounted essences of terrestrial and spiritual exist- ence. I was deprived of definition, position and magnitude and my significance was considerably diminished. Lying there, I felt the weariness ebbing from me slowly, like a tide retiring over limitless sands. The feeling was so pleasur- able and profound that I sighed again a long sound of happi-
￼1 Not excepting even the credulous Kraus (see his De Selbys Leben), all the commentators have treated de Selby's disquisitions on night and sleep with considerable reserve. This is hardly to be wondered at since he held (a) that darkness was simply an accretion of ' black air', i.e., a staining of the atmosphere due to volcanic eruptions too fine to be seen with the naked eye and also to certain ' regrettable' industrial activities involving coal-tar by-products and vegetable dyes; and (b)
￼that sleep was simply a succession of fainting-fits brought on by semi-
disorders at least immediately before the passages were composed. One

￼asphyxiation due to (a). Hatchjaw brings forward his rather facile and ever-ready theory of forgery, pointing to certain unfamiliar syntactical constructions in the first part of the third so-called ' prosecanto' in Golden Hours. He does not, however, suggest that there is anything spurious in de Selby's equally damaging rhodomontade in the Lay- man's Atlas where he inveighs savagely against ' the insanitary con- ditons prevailing everywhere after six o'clock' and makes the famous gaffe that death is merely ' the collapse of the heart from the strain of a lifetime of fits and fainting'. Bassett (in Lux Mundi) has gone to considerable pains to establish the date of these passages and shows that de Selby was hors de combat from his long-standing gall-bladder
￼￼cannot lightly set aside Bassett's formidable table of dates and his corroborative extracts from contemporary newspapers which treat of an unnamed ' elderly man ' being assisted into private houses after having fits in the street. For those who wish to hold the balance for
￼￼
ness. Almost at once I heard another sigh and heard Joe
murmuring some contented incoherency. His voice was near me, yet did not seem to come from the accustomed place within. I thought that he must be lying beside me in the bed and I kept my hands carefully at my sides in case I should accidentally touch him. I felt, for no reason, that his diminu- tive body would be horrible to the human touch—scaly'or slimy like an eel or with a repelling roughness like a cat's tongue.
￼That's not very logical—or complimentary either, he said suddenly.
￼￼What isn't?
That about my body. Why scaly?
￼That's only my joke, I chuckled drowsily. I know you have no body. Except my own, perhaps.
￼￼But why scaly?
I don't know. How can I know why I think my thoughts?
￼By God I won't be called scaly.
￼His voice to my surprise had become shrill with petu- lance. Then he seemed to fill the world with his resentment, not by speaking but by remaining silent after he had spoken.
￼￼themselves, Henderson's Hatchjaw and Bassett is not unuseful. Kraus, usually unscientific and unreliable, is worth reading on this point. (Leben, pp. 17^37.)
￼As in many other of de Selby's concepts, it is difficult to get to grips with his process of reasoning or to refute his curious conclusions. The 'volcanic eruptions', which we may for convenience compare to the infra-visual activity of such substances as radium, take place usually
￼in the ' evening' are stimulated by the smoke and industrial combus-
sumed by the smallest flame, even an electrical luminance isolated in

￼tions of the ' day ' and are intensified in certain places which may, for the want of a better term, be called ' dark places'. One difficulty is precisely this question of terms. A ' dark place ' is dark merely because it is a place where darkness ' germinates ' and ' evening' is a time of twilight merely because the ' day ' deteriorates owing to the stimulating effect of smuts on the volcanic processes. De Selby makes no attempt to explain why a ' dark place' such as a cellar need be dark and does not define the atmospheric, physical or mineral conditions which must prevail uniformly in all such places if the theory is to stand. The ' only straw offered ', to use Bassett's wry phrase, is the statement that ' black air' is highly combustible, enormous masses of it being instantly con-
￼￼a vacuum. ' This,' Bassett observes, ' seems to be an attempt to pro- tect the theory from the shock it can be dealt by simply striking
￼￼
Now, now, Joe, I murmured soothingly.
￼Because if you are looking for trouble you can have your bellyful, he snapped.
You have no body, Joe.
￼Then why do you say I have? And why scaly?
￼Here I had a strange idea not unworthy of de Selby. Why was Joe so disturbed at the suggestion that he had a body? What if he had a body? A body with another body inside it in turn, thousands of such bodies within each other like the skins of an onion, receding to some unimaginable ultimum? Was I in turn merely a link in a vast sequence of imponder- able beings, the world I knew merely the interior of the being whose inner voice I myself was? Who or what was the core and what monster in what world was the final uncontained colossus? God? Nothing? Was I receiving these wild thoughts from Lower Down or were they brewing newly in me to be transmitted Higher Up?
￼From Lower Down, Joe barked.
￼Thank you.
I'm leaving.
What?
￼￼matches and may be taken as the final proof that the great brain was out of gear.'
￼A significant feature of the matter is the absence of any authoritative record of those experiments with which de Selby always sought to support his ideas. It is true that Kraus (see below) gives a forty-page account of certain experiments, mostly concerned with attempts to bottle quantities of ' night' and endless sessions in locked and
￼shuttered bedrooms from which bursts of loud hammering could be
following the unmasking of the de Selby letter scandal by The Times,
￼heard. He explains that the bottling operations were carried out with bottles which were, ' for obvious reasons ', made of black glass. Opaque porcelain jars are also stated to have been used ' with some success'. To use the frigid words of Bassett, ' such information, it is to be feared, makes little contribution to serious deselbiana (sic).'
￼Very little is known of Kraus or his life. A brief biographical note appears in the obsolete Bibliographic de de Selby. He is stated to have been born in Ahrensburg, near Hamburg, and to have worked as a young man in the office of his father, who had extensive jam interests in North Germany. He is said to have disappeared completely from human ken after Hatchjaw had been arrested in a Sheephaven hotel
￼￼which made scathing references to Kraus's ' discreditable ' machina- tions in Hamburg and clearly suggested his complicity. If it is rcmeni-
￼￼
Clearing out. We will see who is scaly in two minutes.
These few words sickened me instantly with fear although their meaning was too momentous to be grasped without close reasoning.
￼The scaly idea—where did I get that from? I cried.
￼Higher Up, he shouted.
￼Puzzled and frightened I tried to understand the com- plexities not only of my intermediate dependence and my catenal unintegrity but also my dangerous adjunctiveness and my embarrassing unisolation. If one assumes—
￼Listen. Before I go I will tell you this. I am your soul and all your souls. When I am gone you are dead. Past humanity is not only implicit in each new man born but is contained in him. Humanity is an ever-widening spiral and life is the beam that plays briefly on each succeeding ring. All human- ity from its beginning to its end is already present but the beam has not yet played beyond you. Your earthly successors await dumbly and trust to your guidance and mine and all my people inside me to preserve them and lead the light further. You are not now the top of your people's line any more than your mother was when she had you inside her. When I leave you I take with me all that has made you what
￼￼bered that these events occurred in the fateful June when the Country Album was beginning to appear in fortnightly parts, the significance of the whole affair becomes apparent. The subsequent exoneration of Hatchjaw served only to throw further suspicion on the shadowy Kraus.
￼Recent research has not thrown much light on Kraus's identity or his ultimate fate. Bassett's posthumous Recollections contains the inter-
￼esting suggestion that Kraus did not exist at all, the name being one of
as being unable to say aught that is charitable or useful, he must pre-
￼the pseudonyms adopted by the egregious du Garbandier to further his ' campaign of calumny'. The Leben, however, seems too friendly in tone to encourage such a speculation.
￼Du Garbandier himself, possibly pretending to confuse the char- acteristics of the English and French languages, persistently uses ' black hair' for ' black air ', and makes extremely elaborate fun of the raven- headed lady of the skies who deluged the world with her tresses every night when retiring.
￼The wisest course on this question is probably that taken by the little-known Swiss writer, Le Clerque. ' This matter,' he says, ' is Outside the true province of the conscientious commentator inasmuch
￼￼serve silence.'
you are—/ take all your significance and importance and all
the accumulations of human instinct and appetite and wis- dom and dignity. You will be left with nothing behind you and nothing to give the waiting ones. Woe to you when they find you out! Good-bye!
￼Although I thought this speech was rather far-fetched and ridiculous, he was gone and I was dead.
￼Preparations for the funeral were put in hand at once. Lying in my dark blanket-padded coffin I could hear the sharp blows of a hammer nailing down the lid.
￼It soon turned out that the hammering was the work of Sergeant Pluck. He was standing smiling at me from the doorway and he looked large and lifelike and surprisingly full of breakfast. Over the tight collar of his tunic he wore a red ring of fat that looked fresh and decorative as if it had come directly from the laundry. His moustache was damp from drinking milk.
￼Thank goodness to be back to sanity, Joe said.
￼His voice was friendly and reassuring, like pockets in an old suit.
￼' Good morning to you in the morning-time,' the Sergeant said pleasantly.
￼I answered him in a civil way and gave particulars of my dream. He leaned listening on the jamb, taking in the diffi- cult parts with a skilled ear. When I had finished he smiled at me in pity and good humour.
￼' You have been dreaming, man,' he said.
￼Wondering at him, I looked away to the window. Night was gone from it without a trace, leaving in substitution a distant hill that lay gently against the sky. Clouds of white and grey pillowed it and on its soft shoulder trees and boulders were put pleasingly to make it true. I could hear a morning wind making its way indomitably throughout the world and all the low unsilence of the daytime was in my ear, bright and restless like a caged bird. I sighed and looked back at the Sergeant, who was still leaning and quietly pick- ing his teeth, absent-faced and still.
￼' I remember well,' he said, ' a dream that I had six years ago on the twenty-third of November next. A nightmare would be a truer word. I dreamt if you please that I had a

￼
slow puncture.'
' That is a surprising thing,' I said idly,' but not astonish- ing. Was it the work of a tintack?'
￼' Not a tintack,' said the Sergeant. ' but too much starch.'
￼' I did not know,' I said sarcastically, ' that they starched Cheroads.'
￼' It was not the road, and for a wonder it was not the fault of the County Council. I dreamt that I was cycling on official business for three days. Suddenly I felt the saddle getting hard and lumpy underneath me. I got down and felt the tyres but they were unexceptionable and fully pumped. Then I thought my head was giving me a nervous outbreak from too much overwork. I went into a private house where there was a qualified doctor and he examined me completely and told me what the trouble was. I had a slow puncture.'
￼He gave a coarse laugh and half-turned to me his enor- mous backside.
￼' Here, look,' he laughed. ' I see,' I murmured.
￼Chuckling loudly he went away for a minute and came backagain.
￼' I have put the stirabout on the table,' he said, ' and the milk is still hot from being inside the cow's milk-bag.'
￼I put on my clothes and went to my breakfast in the day- room where the Sergeant and MacCruiskeen were talking about their figures.
￼' Six point nine six three circulating,' MacCruiskeen was saying.
￼' High,' said the Sergeant. ' Very high. There must be a ground heat. Tell me about the fall.'
￼' A medium fall at midnight and no lumps.'
￼The Sergeant laughed and shook his head.
￼' No lumps indeed,' he chuckled, ' there will be hell to pay tomorrow on the lever if it is true there is a ground heat.'
￼MacCruiskeen got up suddenly from his chair.
￼'I will give her half a hundredweight of charcoal,' he announced. He marched straight out of the house muttering calculations, not.looking where he was going but staring straight into the middle of his black notebook.
￼I had almost finished my crock of porridge and lay back
￼
to look fully at the Sergeant.
' When are you going to hang me?' I asked, looking fear- lessly into his large face. I felt refreshed and strong again and confident that I would escape without difficulty.
￼' Tomorrow morning if we have the scaffold up in time and unless it is raining. You would not believe how slippery the rain can make a new scaffold. You could slip and break your neck into fancy fractures and you would never know what happened to your life or how you lost it.'
￼' Very well,' I said firmly. ' If I am to be a dead man in twenty-four hours will you explain to me what these figures in MacCruiskeen's black book are?'
￼The Sergeant smiled indulgently.
￼' The readings?'
￼' Yes.'
￼c If you are going to be dead completely there is no in- soluble impedimenrum to that proposal,' he said, ' but it is easier to show you than to tell you verbally. Follow behind me like a good man.'
￼He led the way to a door in the back passage and threw it open with an air of momentous revelation, standing aside politely to give me a complete and unobstructed view.
￼' What do you think of that?' he asked.
￼I looked into the room and did not think much of it. It was a small bedroom, gloomy and not too clean. It was in great disorder and filled with a heavy smell.
￼' It is MacCruiskeen's room,' he explained.
￼' I do not see much,' I said.
￼The Sergeant smiled patiently.
￼' You are not looking in the right quarter,' he said.
￼' I have looked everywhere that can be looked,' I said.
￼The Sergeant led the way in to the middle of the floor and took possession of a walking-stick that was convenient.
￼' If I ever want to hide,' he remarked, ' I will always go upstairs in a tree. People have no gift for looking up, they seldom examine the lofty altitudes.'
￼I looked at the ceiling.
￼' There is little to be seen there,' I said, 'except a blue- bottle that looks dead.'
￼The Sergeant looked up and pointed with his stick.

￼
1 That is not a bluebottle/ he said, ' chat is Gogarty's out-
house.'
￼I looked squarely at him in a mixed way but he was paying me no attention but pointing to other tiny marks upon the ceiling.
￼' That,' he said, ' is Martin Bundle's house and that is Tiernahins and that one there is where the married sister lives. And here we have the lane from Tiernahins to the main telegraph trunk road.' He drew his stick along a waver- ing faint crack that ran down to join a deeper crack.
￼1A map!' I cried excitedly.
￼' And here we have the barrack,' he added. ' It is all as plain as a pikestick.'
￼When I looked carefully at the ceiling I saw that Mr Mathers' house and every road and house I knew were marked there, and nets of lanes and neighbourhoods that I did not know also. It was a map of the parish, complete, reliable and astonishing.
￼The Sergeant looked at me and smiled again.
￼' You will agree,' he said, ' that it is a fascinating pan- cake and a conundrum of great incontinence, a phenomenon of the first rarity.'
￼' Did you make it yourself?'
￼' I did not and nobody else manufactured it either. It was always there and MacCruiskeen is certain that it was there even before that. The cracks are natural and so are small cracks.'
￼With my cocked eye I traced the road we came when Gil- haney had found his bicycle at the bush.
' The funny thing is,' the Sergeant said, ' that MacCruis- keen lay for two years staring at that ceiling before he saw it was a map of superb ingenuity.'
￼' Now that was stupid,' I said thickly.
￼' And he lay looking at the map for five years more before he saw that it showed the way to eternity.'
￼'To eternity?'
￼' Certainly.'
￼'Will it be possible for us to eome back from there?' I whispered.
￼' Of course. There is a lift. But wait till I show you the
secret of the map.'
He took up the stick again and pointed to the mark that meant the barracks.
￼' Here we are in the barracks on the main telegraph trunk road/ he said. ' Now use your internal imagination and tell me what left-hand road you meet if you go forth from the barrack on the main road.'
￼I thought this out without difficulty.
￼' You meet the road that meets the main road at Jarvis's outhouse,' I said, ' Where we came from the finding of the bicycle.'
￼' Then that road is the first turn on the left-hand lati- tude?'
￼1 Yes.'
￼' And here it is—here.'
￼He pointed out the left-hand road with his stick and tapped Mr Jarvis's outhouse at the corner.
￼' And now,' he said solemnly, ' kindly inform me what this is.'
￼He drew the stick along a faint crack that joined the crack of the main road about half-way between the barrack and the road at Mr Jarvis's.
￼' What would you call that?' he repeated.
￼' There is no road there,' I cried excitedly, ' the left-hand road at Jarvis's is the first road on the left. I am not a fool. There is no road there.'
￼By God if you're not you will be. You're a goner if you listen to much more of this gentleman's talk.
￼' But there is a road there,' the Sergeant said triumph- antly, ' if you know how to look knowledgeably for it. And a very old road. Come with me till we see the size of it.'
￼' Is this the road to eternity?'
￼' It is indeed but there is no signpost.'
￼Although he made no move to release his bicycle from solitary confinement in the cell, he snapped the clips adroitly on his trousers and led the way heavily into the middle of the morning. We marched together down the road. Neither of us spoke and neither listened for what the other might have to say.
￼When the keen wind struck me in the face it snatched

away the murk of doubt and fear and wonder that was
anchored on my brain like a raincloud on a hill. All my senses, relieved from the agony of dealing with the existence of the Sergeant, became supernaturally alert at the work of interpreting the genial day for my benefit. The world rang in my ear like a great workshop. Sublime feats of mechanics and chemistry were evident on every side. The earth was agog with invisible industry. Trees were active where they stood and gave uncompromising evidence of their strength. Incomparable grasses were forever at hand, lending their distinction to the universe. Patterns very difficult to imagine were made together by everything the eye could see, merg- ing into a supernal harmony their unexceptionable varieties. Men who were notable for the whiteness of their shirts worked diminutively in the distant bog, toiling in the brown turf and heather. Patient horses stood near with their useful carts and littered among the boulders on a hill beyond were tiny sheep at pasture. Birds were audible in the secrecy of the bigger trees, changing branches and conversing not tumultuously. In a field by the road a donkey stood quietly as if he were examining the morning, bit by bit unhurry- ingly. He did not move, his head was high and his mouth chewed nothing. He looked as if he understood completely these unexplainable enjoyments of the world.
￼My eye ranged round unsatisfied. I could not see enough in sufficient fulness before I took the left turn for eternity in company with the Sergeant and my thoughts remained entangled in what my eyes were looking at.
￼You don't mean to say that you believe in this eternity business?
￼What choice have I? It would be foolish to doubt anything after yesterday.
￼That is all very well but I think I can claim to be an authority on the subject of eternity. There must be a limit to this gentleman's monkey-tricks.
￼I am certain there isn't.
￼Nonsense. You are becoming demoralised.
I will be hung tomorrow.
￼That is doubtful but if it has to be faced we will make a brave show.

We?
Certainly. I will be there to the end. In the meantime let us make up our minds that eternity is not up a lane that is found by looking at cracks in the ceiling of a country police- man's bedroom.
￼Then what is up the lane?
￼/ cannot say. If he said that eternity was up the lane and left it at that, I would not kick so hard. But when we are told that we are coming back from there in a lift—well, I begin to think that he is confusing night-clubs with heaven. A lift!
￼Surely, I argued, if we concede that eternity is up the lane, the question of the lift is a minor matter. That is a case for swallowing a horse and cart and straining at a flea.
￼No. I bar the lift. I know enough about the next world to be sure that you don't get there and come back out of it in a lift. Besides, we must be near the place now and I don't see any elevator-shaft running up into the clouds. Gilhaney had no handlebars on him, I pointed out. Unless the word' lift' has a special meaning. Like' drop' when you are talking about a scaffold. I suppose a smash under the chin with a heavy spade could be called a ' lift'. If that is the case you can be certain about eternity and have the whole of it yourself and welcome. I still think there is an electric lift. My attention was drawn away from this conversation to the Sergeant, who had now slackened his pace and was mak- ing curious inquiries with his stick. The road had reached a place where there was rising ground on each side, rank grass and brambles near our feet, with a tangle of bigger things behind that, and tall brown thickets beset with green creeper plants beyond.
￼' It is here somewhere,' the Sergeant said, ' or beside a place somewhere near the next place adjacent.'
￼He dragged his stick along the green margin, probing at the hidden ground.
￼' MacCruiskeen rides his bicycle along the grass here,' he said, ' it is an easier pancake, the wheels are surer and the seat is a more sensitive instrument than the horny hand.' After another walk and more probing he found what he

￼
was searching for and suddenly dragged me into the under-
growth, parting the green curtains of the branches with a practised hand.
￼"This is the hidden road,' he called backwards from ahead.
￼It is not easy to say whether road is the correct name for a place that must be fought through inch by inch at the cost of minor wounds and the sting of strained branches slapping back against the person. Nevertheless the ground was even against the foot and some dim distance to each side I could see the ground banking up sharply with rocks and gloomi- ness and damp vegetation. There was a sultry smell and many flies of the gnat class were at home here.
￼A yard in front of me the Sergeant was plunging on wildly with his head down, thrashing the younger shoots severely with his stick and calling muffled warnings to me of the strong distended boughs he was about to release in my direc- tion.
￼I do not know how long we travelled or what the distance was but the air and the light got scarcer and scarcer until I was sure that we were lost in the bowels of a great forest. The ground was still even enough to walk on but covered with the damp and rotting fall of many autumns. I had fol- lowed the noisy Sergeant with blind faith till my strength was nearly gone, so that I reeled forward instead of walking and was defenceless against the brutality of the boughs. I felt very ill and exhausted. I was about to shout to him that I was dying when I noticed the growth was thinning and that the Sergeant was calling to me, from where he was hidden and ahead of me, that we were there. When I reached him he was standing before a small stone building and bend- ing to take the clips from his trousers.
￼' This is it,' he said, nodding his stooped head at the little house.
￼' This is what?' I muttered.
￼1 The entrance to it,' he replied.
￼The structure looked exactly like the porch of a small country church. The darkness and the confusion of the branches made it hard for me to see whether there was a larger building at the rear. The little porch was old, with

￼
green stains on the stonework and warts of moss in its many
crannies. The door was an old brown door with ecclesiastical hinges and ornamental ironwork; it was set far back and made to measure in its peaked doorway. This was the en- trance to eternity. I knocked the streaming sweat from my forehead with my hand.
￼The Sergeant was feeling himself sensually for his keys.
￼' It is very close,' he said politely.
￼' Is this the entrance to the next world?' I murmured. My voice was lower than I thought it would be owing to my exertions and trepidation.
￼' But it is seasonable weather and we can't complain,' he added loudly, paying no attention to my question. My voice, perhaps, had not been strong enough to travel to his ear.
￼He found a key which he rasped in the keyhole and threw the door open. He entered the dark inside but sent his hand out again to twitch me in after him by the coat sleeve.
￼Strike a match there!
￼Almost at the same time the Sergeant had found a box with knobs and wires in it in the wall and did whatever was necessary to make it give out a startling leaping light from Where it was. But during the second I was standing in the dark I had ample time to get the surprise of my life. It was the floor. My feet were astonished when they trod on it. It was made of platefuls of tiny studs like the floor of a steam- engine or like the railed galleries that run around a great printing press. It rang with a ghostly hollow noise beneath the hobnails of the Sergeant, who had now clattered to the other end of the little room to fuss witb his chain of keys and to throw open another door that was hidden in the wall.
￼' Of course a nice shower of rain would clear the air,' he called.
￼I went carefully over to see what he was doing in the little closet he had entered. Here he had operated successfully an- other unsteady light-box. He stood with his back to me exam- ining panels in the wall. There were two of them, tiny things like matchboxes, and the figure sixteen could be seen in one panel and ten in the other. He sighed and came out of the closet and looked at me sadly.

￼
' They say that walking takes it down,' be said, ' but it is
my own experience that walking puts it up, walking makes it solid and leaves plenty of room for more.'
￼I thought at this stage that a simple and dignified appeal might have some prospect of succeeding.
￼' Will you please tell me,' I said, ' since I will be a dead man tomorrow—where are we and what are we doing?'
￼' Weighing ourselves,' he replied? ' Weighing ourselves?'
￼' Step into the box there,' he said, ' till we see what your registration is by plain record.'
￼I stepped warily on to more iron plates in the closet and saw the figures change to nine and six.
￼' Nine stone six pounds,' said the Sergeant, ' and a most invidious weight. I would give ten years of my life to get the beef down.'
￼He had his back to me again opening still another closet in another wall and passing trained fingers over another light-box. The unsteady light came and I saw him standing in the closet, looking at his large watch and winding it ab- sently. The light was leaping beside his jaw and throwing unearthly leaps of shadow on his gross countenance.
￼' Will you step over here,' he called to me at last, ' and come in with me unless you desire to be left behind in your own company.'
￼When I had walked over and stood silently beside him in the steel closet, he shut the door on us with a precise click and leaned against the wall thoughtfully. I was about to ask for several explanations when a cry of horror came bounding from my throat. With no noise or warning at all, the floor was giving way beneath us.
￼' It is no wonder that you are yawning,' the Sergeant said conversationally, ' it is very close, the ventilation is far from satisfactory.'
' I was only screaming,' I blurted. ' What is happening to this box we are in? Where—'
￼My voice trailed away to a dry cluck of fright. The floor was falling so fast beneath us that it seemed once or twice to fall faster than I could fall myself so that it was sure that my feet had left it and that I had taken up a position for brief intervals half-way between the floor and the ceiling. In
panic I raised my right foot and smote it down with all my weight and my strength. It struck the floor but only with a puny tinkling noise. I swore and groaned and closed my eyes and wished for a happy death. I felt my stomach bounding sickeningly about inside me as if it were a wet football filled with water.
￼Lord save us!
￼' It does a man no harm,' the Sergeant remarked pleas- antly, ' to move around a bit and see things. It is a great thing for widening out the mind. A wide mind is a grand thing, it nearly always leads to farseeing inventions. Look at Sir Walter Raleigh that invented the pedal bicycle and Sir George Stephenson with his steam-engine and Napoleon Bonaparte and George Sand and Walter Scott—great men all.'
￼' Are—are we in eternity yet?' I chattered.
￼' We are not there yet but nevertheless we are nearly there,' he answered. ' Listen with all your ears for a little click.'
￼What can I say to tell of my personal position? I was locked in an iron box with a sixteen-stone policeman, falling appallingly for ever, listening to talk about Walter Scott and listening for a click also.
￼Click!
￼It came at last, sharp and terrible. Almost at once the falling changed, either stopping altogether or becoming a much slower falling.
￼' Yes,' said the Sergeant brightly, ' we are there now.'
￼I noticed nothing whatever except that the thing we were in gave a jolt and the floor seemed to resist my feet suddenly in a way that might well have been eternal. The Sergeant fingered the arrangement of knob-like instruments on the door, which he opened after a time and stepped out.
￼' That was the lift,' he remarked.
￼It is peculiar that when one expects some horrible in- calculable and devastating thing which does not materialise, one is more disappointed than relieved. I had expected for one thing a blaze of eye-destroying light. No other expecta- tion was clear enough in my brain to be mentioned. Instead
of this radiance, I saw a long passage lit fitfully at intervals
by the crude home-made noise-machines, with more dark- ness to be seen than light. The walls of the passage seemed to be made with bolted sheets of pig-iron in which were set raws of small doors which looked to me like ovens or furnace-doors or safe-deposits such as banks have. The ceil- ing, where I could see it, was a mass of wires and what appeared to be particularly thick wires or possibly pipes. All the time there was an entirely new noise to be heard, not unmusical, sometimes like water gurgling underground and sometimes like subdued conversation in a foreign tongue.
￼The Sergeant was already looming ahead on his way up the passage, treading heavily on the plates. He swung his keys jauntily and hummed a song. I followed near him, try- ing to count the little doors. There were four rows of six in every lineal two yards of wall, or a total of many thousands. Here and there I saw a dial or an intricate nest of clocks and knobs resembling a control board with masses of coarse wires converging from all quarters of it. I did not understand the significance of anything but I thought the scene was so real that much of my fear was groundless. I trod firmly be- side the Sergeant, who was still real enough for anybody.
￼We came to a crossroads in the passage where the light was brighter. A cleaner brighter passage with shiny steel walls ran away to each side, disappearing from view only where the distance brought its walls, floor and roof to the one gloomy point. I thought I could hear a sound like hiss- ing steam and another noise like great cogwheels grinding one way, stopping and grinding back again. The Sergeant paused to take a reading from a clock in the wall, then turned sharply to the left and called for me to follow.
￼I shall not recount the passages we walked or talk of the one with the round doors like portholes or the other place where the Sergeant got a box of matches for himself by putting his hand somewhere into the wall. It is enough to say that we arrived, after walking at least a mile of plate, into a well-lit airy hall which was completely circular and filled with indescribable articles very like machinery but not quite as intricate as the more difficult machines. Large expensive- looking cabinets of these articles were placed tastefully about the floor while the circular wall was one mass of these inventions with little dials and meters placed plentifully here and there. Hundreds of miles of coarse wire were visible running everywhere except about the floor and there were thousands of doors like the strong-hinged doors of ovens and arrangements of knobs and keys that reminded me of American cash registers.
￼The Sergeant was reading out figures from one of the many clocks and turning a small wheel with great care. Sud- denly the silence was split by the sound of loud frenzied hammering from the far end of the hall where the apparatus seemed thickest and most complex. The blood ran away at once from my startled face. I looked at the Sergeant but he still attended patiently to his clock and wheel, reciting num- bers under his breath and taking no notice. The hammering stopped.
￼I sat down to think and gather my scattered wits on a smooth article like an iron bar. It was pleasantly warm and comforting. Before any thought had time to come to me there was another burst of hammering, Chen silence, then a low but violent noise like passionately-muttered oaths, then silence again and finally the sound of heavy footsteps approaching from behind the tall cabinets of machinery.
￼Feeling a weakness in my spine, I went over quickly and stood beside the Sergeant. He had taken a long white instru- ment like a large thermometer or band conductor's baton out of a hole in the wall and was examining the calibrations on it with a frown of great preoccupation. He paid no attention to me or to tihe hidden presence that was approaching in- visibly. When I heard the clanging steps rounding the last cabinet, against my will I looked up wildly. It was Policeman MacCruiskeen. He was frowning heavily and bearing an- other large baton or thermometer which was orange- coloured. He made straight for the Sergeant and showed him this instrument, putting a red finger on a marking that was on it. They stood there silently examining each other's in- struments. The Sergeant looked somewhat relieved, I thought, when he had the matter thought out and marched away to the hidden place that MacCruiskeen had just come from. Soon we heard the sound of hammering, this time gentle and rhythmical.
MacCruiskeen put his baton away into the wall in the hole where the Sergeant's had been and turned to me, giving me generously the wrinkled cigarette which I had come to re- gard as the herald of unthinkable conversation.
￼' Do you like it?' he inquired.
￼' It is neat,' I replied.
￼'You would not believe the convenience of it,' he re- marked cryptically.
￼The Sergeant came back to us drying his red hands on a towel and looking very satisfied with himself. I looked at the two of them sharply. They received my glance and ex- changed it privately between them before discarding it.
￼' Is this eternity?' I asked. ' Why do you call it eternity?'
￼'Feel my chin,' MacCruiskeen said, smiling enigmatic- ally.
￼' We call it that,' the Sergeant explained, ' because you don't grow old here. When you leave here you will be the same age as you were coming in and the same stature and latitude. There is an eight-day clock here with a patent bal- anced action but it never goes.'
￼' How can you be sure you don't grow old here?'
￼" Feel my chin,' MacCruiskeen said again.
￼' It is simple,' the Sergeant said. ' The beard does not grow and if you are fed you do not get hungry and if you are hungry you don't get hungrier. Your pipe will smoke all day and will still be full and a glass of whiskey will still be there no matter how much of it you drink and it does not matter in any case because it will not make you drunker than your own sobriety.'
￼' Indeed,' I muttered.
￼' I have been here for a long time this today morning,' MacCruiskeen said, ' and my jaw is still as smooth as a woman's back and the convenience of it takes my breath away, it is a great thing to downface the old razor.'
￼' How big is all this place?'
￼' It has no size at all,' the Sergeant explained, ' because there is no difference anywhere in it and we have no con- ception of the extent of its unchanging coequality.'
￼MacCruiskeen lit a match for our cigarettes and then threw it carelessly on the plate floor where it lay looking
very much important and alone.
￼' Could you not bring your bicycle and ride through all of it and see it all and draw a chart?' I asked.
￼The Sergeant smiled at me as if I were a baby.
￼' The bicycle is easy,' he said.
￼To my astonishment he went over to one of the bigger ovens, manipulated some knobs, pulled open the massive metal door and lifted out a brand-new bicycle. It had a three- speed gear and an oil-bath and I could see the vaseline still glistening on the bright parts. He put the front wheel down and spun the back wheel expertly in the air.
￼' The bicycle is an easy pancake,' he said, ' but it is no use and does not matter. Come and I will demonstrate the res ipsa.'
￼Leaving the bicycle, he led the way through the intricate cabinets and round behind other cabinets and in through a doorway. What I saw made my brain shrink painfully in my head and put a paralysing chill across my heart. It was not so much that this other hall was in every respect an exact replica of the one we had just left. It was more that my burdened eye saw that one of the cabinet doors in the wall was standing open and a brand-new bicycle was leaning against the wall, identically like the other one and leaning even at the same angle.
￼' If you want to take another walk ahead to reach the same place here without coming back you can walk on till you reach the next doorway and you are welcome. But it will do you no good and even if we stay here behind you it is pro- bable that you will find us there to meet you.'
￼Here I gave a cry as my eye caught a spent match lying clearly on the floor.
￼' What do you think of the no-shaving?' MacCruiskeen asked boastfully. ' Surely that is an uninterruptible experi- ment?'
￼' It is inescapable and highly intractable,' the Sergeant said.
MacCruiskeen was examining some knobs in a central cabinet. He turned his head and called to me.
￼' Come over here,' he called, ' till I show you something to tell your friends about.'
Afterwards I saw that this was one of his rare jokes be- cause what he showed me was something that I could tell nobody about, there are no suitable words in the world to tell my meaning. This cabinet had an opening resembling a chute and another large opening resembling a black hole about a yard below the chute. He pressed two red articles like typewriter keys and turned a large knob away from him. At once there was a rumbling noise as if thousands of full biscuit-boxes were falling down a stairs. I felt that these fall- ing things would come out of the chute at any moment. And so they did, appearing for a few seconds in die air and then disappearing down the black hole below. But what can I say about them? In colour they were not white or black and cer- tainly bore no intermediate colour; they were far from dark and anything but bright. But strange to say it was not their unprecedented hue that took most of my attention. They had another quality that made me watch them wild-eyed, dry-throated and with no breathing. I can make no attempt to describe this quality. It took me hours of thought long afterwards to realise why these articles were astonishing. They lacked an essential property of all known objects. I cannot call it shape or configuration since shapelessness is not what I refer to at all. I can only say that these objects, not one of which resembled the other, were of no known dimensions. They were not square or rectangular or circular or simply irregularly shaped nor could it be said that their endless variety was due to dimensional dissimilarities. Simply their appearance, if even that word is not inadmissible, was not understood by the eye and was in any event indescrib- able. That is enough to say.
￼When MacCruiskeen had unpressed the buttons the Ser- geant asked me politely what else I would like to see.
￼'What else is there?' ' Anything.'
￼' Anything I mention will be shown to me?'
￼' Of course.'
￼The ease with which the Sergeant had produced a bicycle that would cost at least eight pounds ten to buy had set in motion in my head certain trains of thought. My nervousness had been largely reduced to absurdity and nothingness
by what I had seen and I now found myself taking an inter- est in the commercial possibilities of eternity.
￼' What I would like,' I said slowly, ' is to see you open a door and lift out a solid block of gold weighing half a toa'
￼The Sergeant smiled and shrugged his shoulders.
￼' But that is impossible, it is a very unreasonable requisi- tion,' he said.' It is vexatious and unconscionable,' he added legally.
￼My heart sank down at this.
￼' But you said anything.''
￼' I know, man. But there is a limit and a boundary to everything within the scope of reason's garden.'
￼' That is disappointing,' I muttered. MacCruiskeen stirred diffidently.
￼' Of course,' he said, ' if there would be no objection to me assisting the Sergeant in lifting out the block . . .'
￼' What! Is that a difficulty?'
￼' I am not a cart-horse,' the Sergeant said with simple dignity.
￼' Yet, anyhow,' he added, reminding all of us of his great- grandfather.
￼' Then we'll all lift it out,' I cried.
￼And so we did. The knobs were manipulated, the door opened and the block of gold, which was encased in a well- made timber box, was lifted down with all our strength and placed on the floor.
￼' Gold is a common article and there is not much to see when you look at it,' the Sergeant observed. ' Ask him for something confidential and superior to ordinary pre-emin- ence. Now a magnifying glass is a better thing because you can look at it and what you see when you look is a third thing altogether.'
￼Another door was opened by MacCruiskeen and I was handed a magnifying glass, a very ordinary-looking instru- ment with a bone handle. I looked at my hand through it and saw nothing that was recognisable. Then I looked at several other things but saw nothing that I could clearly see. MacCruiskeen took it back with a smile at my puzzled eye.
￼' It magnifies to invisibility,' he explained. ' It makes everything so big that there is room in the glass for only
the smallest particle of it—not enough of it to make it differ- ent from any other thing that is dissimilar.'
￼My eye moved from his explaining face to the block of gold which my attention had never really left.
￼' What I would like to see now.' I said carefully, ' is fifty cubes of solid gold each weighing one pound.'
￼MacCruiskeen went away obsequiously like a trained waiter and got these articles out of the wall without a word, arranging them in a neat structure on the floor. The Ser- geant had strolled away idly to examine some clocks and take readings. In the meantime my brain was working coldly and quickly, I ordered a bottle of whiskey, precious stones to the value of £200,000, some bananas, a fountain-pen and writing materials, and finally a serge suit of blue with silk linings. When all these things were on the floor, I remem- bered other things I had overlooked and ordered underwear, shoes and banknotes, and a box of matches. MacCruiskeen, sweating from his labour with the heavy doors, was com- plaining of the heat and paused to drink some amber ale. The Sergeant was quietly clicking a little wheel with a tiny ratchet.
￼' I think that is all,' I said at last.
￼The Sergeant came forward and gazed at the pile of mer- chandise.
￼' Lord, save us,' he said.
￼' I am going to take these things with me,' I announced. The Sergeant and MacCruiskeen exchanged their private glance. Then they smiled.
￼' In that case you will need a big strong bag,' the Sergeant said. He went to another door and got me a hogskin bag worth at least fifty guineas in the open market. I carefully packed away my belongings.
￼I saw MacCruiskeen crushing out his cigarette on the wall and noticed that it was still the same length as it had been when lit half an hour ago. My own was burning quietly also but was completely unconsumed. I crushed it out also and put it in my pocket.
￼When about to close the bag I had a thought. I unstooped and turned to the policemen. 'I require just one thing more,' I said. ' I want a small
weapon suitable for the pocket which will exterminate any man or any million men who try at any time to take my life.'
Without a word the Sergeant brought me a small black article like a torch.
￼' There is an influence in that/ he said, ' that will change any man or men into grey powder at once if you point it and press the knob and if you don't like grey powder you can have purple powder or yellow powder or any other shade of powder if you tell me now and confide your favour- ite colour. Would a velvet-coloured colour please you?'
￼' Grey will do,' I said briefly.
￼I put this murderous weapon into the bag, closed it and stood up again.
￼' I think we might go home now.' I said the words casually and took care not to look at the faces of the policemen. To my surprise they agreed readily and we started off with our resounding steps till we found ourselves again in the end- less corridors, I carrying the heavy bag and the policemen conversing quietly about the readings they had seen. I felt happy and satisfied with my day. I felt changed and re- generated and full of fresh courage.
￼' How does this thing work?' I inquired pleasantly, seek- ing to make friendly conversation. The Sergeant looked at me.
￼' It has helical gears,' he said informatively.
￼' Did you not see the wires?' MacCruiskeen asked, turn- ing to me in some surprise.
￼' You would be astonished at the importance of the char- coal,' the Sergeant said. c The great thing is to keep the beam reading down as low as possible and you are doing very well if the pilot-mark is steady. But if you let the beam rise, where are you with your lever? If you neglect the charcoal feedings you will send the beam rocketing up and there is bound to be a serious explosion.'
￼' Low pilot, small fall,' MacCruiskeen said. He spoke neatly and wisely as if his remark was a proverb.
' But the secret of it all-in-all,' continued the Sergeant, ' is the daily readings. Attend to your daily readings and your conscience will be as clear as a clean shirt on Sunday
morning. I am a great believer in the daily readings.'
￼' Did I see everything of importance?'
￼At this the policemen looked at each other in amazement and laughed outright. Their raucous roars careered away from us up and down the corridor and came back again in pale echoes from the distance.
￼'I suppose you think a smell is a simple thing?' ±e Ser- geant said smiling.
￼'A smell?'
￼'A smell is the most complicated phenomenon in the world,' he said, ' and it cannot be unravelled by the human snout or understood properly although dogs have a better way with smells than we have.'
￼' But dogs are very poor riders on bicycles,' MacCruiskeen said, presenting the other side of the comparison.
￼' We have a machine down there,' the Sergeant continued, ' that splits up any smell into its sub- and inter-smells the way you can split up a beam of light with a glass instru- ment. It is very interesting and edifying, you would not be- lieve the dirty smells that are inside the perfume of a lovely lily-of-the mountain.'
￼'And there is a machine for tastes,' MacCruiskeen put in, ' the taste of a fried chop, although you might not think it, is forty per cent the taste of.. .'
￼He grimaced and spat and looked delicately reticent.
￼'And feels,' the Sergeant said. ' Now there is nothing so smooth as a woman's back or so you might imagine. But if that feel is broken up for you, you would not be pleased with women's backs, I'll promise you that on my solemn oath and parsley. Half of the inside of the smoothness is as rough as a bullock's hips.'
￼' The next time you come here,' MacCruiskeen promised, 'you will see surprising things.'
￼This in itself, I thought, was a surprising thing for any- one to say after what I had just seen and after what I was carrying in the bag. He groped in his pocket, found his cigar- ette, re-lit it and proffered me the match. Hampered with the heavy bag, I was some minutes finding mine but the match still burnt evenly and brightly at its end. We smoked in silence and went on through the dim pass-
age till we reached the lift again. There were clock-faces or dials beside the open lift which I had not seen before and another pair of doors beside it. I was very tired with my bag of gold and clothes and whiskey and made for the lift to stand on it and put the bag down at last. When nearly on the threshold I was arrested in my step by a call from the Sergeant which rose nearly to the pitch of a woman's scream.
￼'Don't go in there!'
￼The colour fled from my face at the urgency of his tone. I turned my head round and stood rooted there with one foot before the other like a man photographed unknowingly in the middle of a walk.
￼' Why?'
￼' Because the floor will collapse underneath the bottom of your feet and send you down where nobody went before you.'
￼'And why?'
￼' The bag, man.'
￼' The simple thing is,' MacCruiskeen said calmly, ' that you cannot enter the lift unless you weigh the same weight as you weighed when you weighed into it.'
￼* If you do,' said the Sergeant, ' it will extirpate you un- conditionally and kill the life out of you.'
￼I put the bag, clinking with its bottle and gold cubes, rather roughly on the floor. It was worth several million pounds. Standing there on the plate floor, I leaned on the plate wall and searched my wits for some reason and under- standing and consolation-in-adversity. I understood little ex- cept that my plans were vanquished and my visit to eternity unavailing and calamitous. I wiped a hand on my damp brow and stared blankly at the two policemen, who were now smiling and looking knowledgeable and complacent. A large emotion came swelling against my throat and filling my mind with great sorrow and a sadness more remote and desolate than a great strand at evening with the sea far away at its distant turn. Looking down with a bent head at my broken shoes, I saw them swim and dissolve in big tears that came bursting on my eyes. I turned to the wall and gave loud choking sobs and broke down completely and cried loudly like a baby. I do not know how long I was crying. I think I heard the two policemen discussing me in sympathetic undertones as if they were trained doctors in a hospital. Without lifting my head I looked across the floor and saw MacCruiskeen's legs walking away with my bag. Then I heard an oven door being opened and the bag fired roughly in. Here I cried loudly again, turning to the wall of the lift and giving complete rein to my great misery.
￼At last I was taken gently by the shoulders, weighed and guided into the lift. Then I felt the two large policemen crowding in beside me and got the heavy smell of blue official broadcloth impregnated through and through with their humanity. As the floor of the lift began to resist my feet, I felt a piece of crisp paper rustling against my averted face. Looking up in the poor light I saw that MacCruiskeen was stretching his hand in my direction dumbly and meekly across the chest of the Sergeant who was standing tall and still beside me. In the hand was a small white paper bag. I glanced into it and saw round coloured things the size of florins.
￼' Creams,' MacCruiskeen said kindly.
￼He shook the bag encouragingly and started to chew and suck loudly as if there was almost supernatural pleasure to be had from these sweetmeats. Beginning for some reason to sob again, I put my hand into the bag but when I took a sweet, three or four others which had merged with it in the heat of the policeman's pocket came out with it in one sticky mass of plaster. Awkwardly and foolishly I tried to disen- tangle them but failed completely and then rammed the Jot into my mouth and stood there sobbing and sucking and snuffling. I heard the Sergeant sighing heavily and could feeJ his broad flank receding as he sighed.
￼' Lord, I love sweets,' he murmured.
￼' Have one,' MacCruiskeen smiled, rattling his bag.
￼' What are you saying, man,' the Sergeant cried, turning to view MacCruiskeen's face, ' are you out of your mind, man alive? If I took one of these—not one but half of a corner of the quarter of one of them—I declare to the Hokey that my stomach would blow up like a live landmine and I would be galvanised in my bed for a full fortnight roaring out profanity from terrible stoons of indigestion and heart-scalds. Do you want to kill me, man?'
' Sugar barley is a very smooth sweet,' MacCruiskeen said, speaking awkwardly with his bulging mouth. ' They give it to babies and it is a winner for the bowels.'
' If I ate sweets at all,' the Sergeant said, ' I would live on the " Carnival Assorted ". Now there is a sweet for you. There is great sucking in them, the flavour is very spiritual and one of them is good for half an hour.'
￼' Did you ever try liquorice Pennies?' asked MacCruis- keen.
￼' Not them but the " Fourpenny Coffee-Cream Mixture " have a great charm.'
￼' Or the Dolly Mixture?
￼'No.'
￼' They say,' MacCruiskeen said, ' that the Dolly Mixture is the best that was ever made and that it will never be sur- passed and indeed I could eat them and keep eating till I got sick.'
￼' That may be,' the Sergeant said,' but if I had my health I would give you a good run for it with the Carnival Mix- ture.' As they wrangled on about sweets and passed to choco- late bars and sticks of rock, the floor was pressing strongly from underneath. Then there was a change in the pressing, two clicks were heard and the Sergeant started to undo the doors, explaining to MacCruiskeen his outlook on Ju-jubes and jelly-sweets and Turkish Delights.
￼With sloped shoulders and a face that was stiff from my dried tears, I stepped wearily out of the lift into the little stone room and waited till they had checked the clocks. Then I followed them into the thick bushes and kept behind them as they met the attacks of the branches and fought back. I did not care much.
￼It was not until we emerged, breathless and with bleeding hands, on the green margin of the main road that I realised that a strange thing had happened. It was two or three hours since the Sergeant and I had started on our journey yet the country and the trees and all the voices of every thing around still wore an air of early morning. There was incommunic- able earliness in everything, a sense of waking and beginning. Nothing had yet grown or matured and nothing begun had yet finished. A bird singing had not yet turned finally the
last twist of tunefulness. A rabbit emerging still had a hidden tail.

The Sergeant stood monumentally in the middle of the hard grey road and picked some small green things deli- cately from his person. MacCruiskeen stood stooped in knee- high grass looking over his person and shaking himself sharply like a hen. I stood myself looking wearily into the bright sky and wondering over the wonders of the high morning.
When the Sergeant was ready he made a polite sign with his thumb and the two of us set off together in the direction of the barrack. MacCruiskeen was behind but he soon appeared silently in front of us, sitting without a move on the top of his quiet bicycle. He said nothing as he passed us and stirred no breath or limb and he rolled away from us down the gentle hill till a bend received him silently.

As I walked with the Sergeant I did not notice where we were or what we passed by on the road, men, beasts or houses. My brain was like an ivy near where swallows fly. Thoughts were darting around me like a sky that was loud and dark with birds but none came into me or near enough. Forever in my ear was the click of heavy shutting doors, the whine of boughs trailing their loose leaves in a swift springing and the clang of hobnails on metal plates.

When I reached the barrack I paid no attention to any- thing or anybody but went straight to a bed and lay on it and fell into a full and simple sleep. Compared with this sleep, death is a restive thing, peace is a clamour and dark- ness a burst of light.