[2-1] Le Fournier, the reliable French commentator (in De Selby— I'Enigme de I'Occideni) has put forward a curious theory regarding￼these 'habitats'. He suggests that de Selby, when writing the Album, paused to consider some point of difficulty and in the meantime engaged in the absent-minded practice known generally as' doodling', then putting his manuscript away. The next time he took it up he was confronted with a mass of diagrams and drawings which he took to be the plans of a type of dwelling he always had in mind and immediately wrote many pages explaining the sketches.' In no other way,' adds the severe Le Fournier, 'can one explain so regrettable a lapse.'

[2-2] It is not clear whether de Selby had heard of this but he suggests (Garcia, p. i2) that night, far from being caused by the commonly accepted theory of planetary movements, was due to accumulations of 1 black air' produced by certain volcanic activities of which he does not treat in detail. See also p. 79 and 945, Country Album. Le Fournier's comment (in Homme ou Dieu) is interesting.' On ne saura jamais jusqu'a quel point de Selby fut cause de la Grande Guerre, mais, sans aucun doute, ses theories excentriques—specialement celle que nuit n'est pas un phenomene de nature, mais dans
￼I'atmosphere un etat malsain amene par un industrialisme cupide et sans pitie—aurent l'effet de produire un trouble profond dans les masses.'

[3-1] De Selby (Golden Hours, p. 93, et seq.) has put forward an interesting theory on names. Going back to primitive times, he regards the earliest names as crude onomatopaeic associations with the appearance of the person or object named—thus harsh or rough manifestations being represented by far from pleasant gutturalities and vice versa. This idea he pursued to rather fanciful lengths, drawing up elaborate paradigms of vowels and consonants purporting to correspond to certain indices of human race, colour and temperament and claiming ultimately to be in a position to state the physiological ' group ' of any person merely from a brief study of the letters of his name after the word had been ' rationalised' to allow for variations of language. Certain ' groups' he showed to be universally ' repugnant' to other ' groups '. An unhappy commentary on the theory was furnished by the activities of his own nephew, whether through ignorance or con- tempt for the humanistic researches of his uncle. The nephew set about a Swedish servant, from whom he was completely excluded by the paradigms, in the pantry of a Portsmouth hotel to such purpose that de Selby had to open his purse to the tune of five or six hundred pounds to avert an unsavoury law case.

[4-1] These are evidently the same films which he mentions in Golden Hours (p. 155) as having 'a strong repetitive element' and as being ' tedious '. Apparently he had examined them patiently picture by picture and imagined that they would be screened in the same way, failing at that time to grasp the principle of the cinematograph.

[5-1] Hatchjaw remarks (unconfirmed, however, by Bassett) that throughout the whole ten years that went to the writing of The Country Album de Selby was obsessed with mirrors and had recourse to them so frequently that he claimed to have two left hands and to be living in a world arbitrarily bounded by a wooden frame. As time went on he refused to countenance a direct view of anything and had a small mirror permanently suspended at a certain angle in front of his eyes by a wired mechanism of his own manufacture. After he had resorted to this fantastic arrangement, he interviewed visitors with his back to them and with his head inclined towards the ceiling; he was even credited with long walks backwards in crowded thoroughfares. Hatchjaw claims that his statement is supported by the Ms. of some three hundred pages of the Album, written backwards, ' a circumstance that made necessary the extension of the mirror principle to the bench of the wretched printer.' (De Selby's Life and Times, p. 221.) This manuscript cannot now be found.

[9-1] Le Clerque (in his almost forgotten Extensions and Analyses) has drawn attention to the importance of percussion in the de Selby dialectic and shown that most of the physicist's experiments were ex- tremely noisy. Unfortunately the hammering was always done behind locked doors and no commentator has hazarded even a guess as to what was being hammered and for what purpose. Even when con- structing the famous water-box, probably the most delicate and fragile instrument ever made by human hands, de Selby is known to have
￼smashed three heavy coal-hammers and was involved in undignified legal proceedings with his landlord (the notorious Porter) arising from an allegation of strained floor-joists and damage to a ceiling. It is clear that he attached considerable importance to ' hammerwork'. (v. Golden Hours, p. 48-9). In The Layman's Atlas he publishes a rather obscure account of his inquiries into the nature of hammering and boldly attributes the sharp sound of percussion to the bursting of ' atmosphere balls ' evidently envisaging the air as being composed of minute balloons, a view scarcely confirmed by later scientific research. In his disquisitions elsewhere on the nature of night and darkness, he refers in passing to the straining of ' air-skins', al. ' air-balls' and ' bladders '. His conclusion was that ' hammering is anything but what
￼￼
it appears to be '; such a statement, if not open to explicit refutation,
seems unnecessary and unenlightening.
￼Hatchjaw has put forward the suggestion that loud hammering wa» a device resorted to by the savant to drown other noises which might give some indication of the real trend of the experiments. Bassett has concurred in this view, with, however, two reservations.
￼s The reader will be familiar with the storms which have raged over operations on an unspecified farm'. Such disagreement, it must be con-

dispute could be cleared up, there was a further bombshell, this time
is known to have obtained, presumably by questionable means, a proof

￼this most tantalising of holograph survivals. The ' Codex' (first so- called by Bassett in his monumental De Selby Compendium) is a col- lection of some two thousand sheets of foolscap closely hand-written on both sides. The signal distinction of the manuscript is that not one word of the writing is legible. Attempts made by different commenta- tors to decipher certain passages which look less formidable than others have been characterised by fantastic divergencies, not in the meaning of the passages (of which there is no question) but in the brand of non- sense which is evolved. One passage, described by Bassett as being ' a penetrating treatise on old age' is referred to by Henderson (bio- grapher of Bassett) as ' a not unbeautiful description of lambing
￼￼fessed, does little to enhance the reputation of either writer.
￼Hatchjaw, probably displaying more astuteness than scholastic acumen, again advances his forgery theory and professes amazement that any person of intelligence could be deluded by ' so crude an imposition'. A curious contretemps arose when, challenged by Bassett to substantiate this cavalier pronouncement, Hatchjaw casually mentioned that eleven pages of the ' Codex' were all numbered ' 88'. Bassett, evidently taken by surprise, performed an independent check and could discover no page at all bearing this number. Subsequent wrang- ling disclosed the startling fact that both commentators claimed to have in their personal possession the ' only genuine Codex '. Before this from far-off Hamburg. The Norddeutsche Verlag published a book by the shadowy Kraus purporting to be an elaborate exegesis based on an authentic copy of the ' Codex' with a transliteration of what was described as the obscure code in which the document was written. If Kraus can be believed, the portentously-named ' Codex' is simply a collection of extremely puerile maxims on love, life, mathematics and the like, couched in poor ungrammatical English and entirely lacking de Selby's characteristic reconditeness and obscurity. Bassett and many of the other commentators, regarding this extraordinary book as merely another manifestation of the mordant du Garbandier's spleen, pretended never to have heard of it notwithstanding the fact that Bassett

of the work many months before it appeared. Hatchjaw alone did not ignore the book. Remarking dryly in a newspaper article that Kraus's ' aberration' was due to a foreigner's confusion of the two English words code and codex, declared his intention of publishing ' a brief brochure' which would effectively discredit the German's work and all similar 'trumpery frauds'. The failure of this work to appear is popularly attributed fo Kraus's machinations in Hamburg and lengthy sessions on the transcontinental wire. In any event, the wretched Hatchjaw was again arrested, this time at the suit of his own pub-lishers who accused him of the larceny of some of the firm's desk fittings. The case was adjourned and subsequently struct out owing to the failure to appear of certain unnamed witnesses from abroad. Clear as it is that this fantastic charge was without a vestige of foundation, Hatchjaw failed to obtained any redress from the author- ities.
￼It cannot be pretended that the position regarding this ' Codex' is
forgery. Hatchjaw's reply is not extant but it is thought that he refused
￼at all satisfactory and it is not likely that time or research will throw any fresh light on a document which cannot be read and of which four copies at least, all equally meaningless, exist in the name of being the genuine original.
￼An amusing diversion in this affair was unwittingly caused by the mild Le Clerque. Hearing of the ' Codex ' some months before Bassett's authoritative ' Compendium ' was published, he pretended to have read the ' Codex ' and in an article in the £uercher Tageblatt made many vague comments on it, referring to its ' shrewdness', ' compelling if novel arguments ', ' fresh viewpoint', etc. Subsequently he repudiated the article and asked Hatchjaw in a private letter to denounce it as a
￼￼with some warmth to be party to any further hanky-panky in con- nection with the ill-starred ' Codex '. It is perhaps unnecessary to refer to du Garbandier's contribution to this question. He contented himself with an article in I'Avenir in which he professed to have decyphered the ' Codex' and found it to be a repository of obscene conundrums, accounts of amorous adventures and erotic speculation, ' all too lamentable to be repeated even in broad outline '.
￼* Thought to be a reference to the ' Codex '.

[9-2] Naturally, no explanation is given of what is meant by ' abusing ' water but it is noteworthy that the savant spent several months trying to discover a satisfactory method of ' diluting' water, holding that it was' too strong ' for many of the novel uses to which he desired to put it. Bassett suggests that the De Selby Water Box was invented for this ing is to be persisted in so immoderately'. It was on this occasion that purpose although he cannot explain how the delicate machinery is set in motion. So many fantastic duties have assigned to this inscrutable mechanism (witness Kraus's absurd sausage theory) that Bassett's speculation must not be allowed the undue weight which his authorita- tive standing would tend to lend it.

'Almost all of the numerous petty litigations in which de Selby was involved afford a salutary example of the humiliations which great minds may suffer when forced to have contact with the pedestrian intellects of the unperceiving laity. On one of the water-wastage hearings the Bench permitted itself a fatuous inquiry as to why the defendant did not avail himself of the metered industrial rate ' if bath-
￼￼de Selby made the famous retort that ' one does not readily accept the view that paradise is limited by the capacity of a municipal waterworks or human happiness by water-meters manufactured by unemancipated labour in Holland.' It is some consolation to recall that the forcible medical examination which followed was characterised by an enlight- enment which redounds to this day to the credit of the medical pro- fession. De Selby's discharge was unconditional and absolute.

[9-3] ￼"Hatchjaw (in his invaluable Conspectus of the de Selby Dialetic) has described the house as ' the most water-piped edifice in the world.' Even in the living-rooms there were upwards of ten rough farmyard taps, some with zinc troughs and some (as those projecting from the ceiling and from converted gas-brackets near the fireplace) directed at the unprotected floor. Even on the stairs a three-inch main may still be seen nailed along the rail of the balustrade with a tap at intervals ofone foot, while under the stairs and in every conceivable hiding-place there were elaborate arrangements of cisterns and storage-tanks. Even the gas pipes were connected up with this water system and would gush strongly at any attempt to provide the light. Du Garbandier in this connection has permitted himself some coarse and cynical observations bearing upon cattle lairages.


[11-1] Le Fournier, the conservative French commentator (in his De Selby—Lieu ou Homme?) has written exhaustively on the non-scientific aspects of de Selby's personality and has noticed several failings and weaknesses difficult to reconcile with his dignity and eminence as a physicist, ballistician, philosopher and psychologist. Though he did not recognise sleep as such, preferring to regard the phenomenon as a series of ' fits ' and heart-attacks, his habit of falling asleep in public earned for him the enmity of several scientific brains of the inferior calibre. These sleeps took place when walking in crowded thoroughfares, at meals and on at least one occasion in a public lavatory. (Du Garbandier has given this latter incident malignant publicity in his pseudo-scientific ' redaction ' of the police court proceedings to which he added a virulent preface assailing the savant's moral character in terms which, however intemperate, admit of no ambiguity.) It is true that some of these sleeps occurred without warning at meetings of learned societies when the physicist had been asked to state his views on some abstruse problem but there is no inference, pace du Garbandier, that they were 'extremely opportune'.

Another of de Selby's weaknesses was his inability to distinguish between men and women. After the famous occasion when the Countess Schnapper had been presented to him (her Glauben ueber Ueberalls is still read) he made flattering references to 'that man ', 'that cultured old gentleman', 'crafty old boy' and so on. The age, dealing with doubtful or obscene matter, he produced a pamphlet intellectual attainments and style of dress of the Countess would make this a pardonable error for anybody afflicted with poor sight but it is feared that the same cannot be said of other instances when young shop-girls, waitresses and the like were publicly addressed as ' boys'. In the few references which he ever made to his own mysterious family he called his mother ' a very distinguished gentleman' (Lux Mundi p. 307), ' a man of stern habits ' (ibid, p. 308) and " a man's man ' (Kraus: Briefe, xvii). Du Garbandier (in his extraordinary Histoire de Notre Temps) has seized on this pathetic shortcoming to outstep, not the prudent limits of scientific commentary but all known horizons of human decency. Taking advantage of the laxity of French law in
￼￼masquerading as a scientific treatise on sexual idiosyncracy in which de Selby is arraigned by name as the most abandoned of all human monsters.
￼Henderson and several lesser authorities on the Hatchjaw-Bassett school have taken the appearance of this regrettable document as the proximate cause of Hatchjaw's precipitate departure for Germany. It is now commonly accepted that Hatchjaw was convinced that the name ' du Garbandier' was merely a pseudonym adopted for his own ends by the shadowy Kraus. It will be recalled that Bassett took the opposite view, holding that Kraus was a name used by the mordant Frenchman for spreading his slanders in Germany. It may be observed appearance of a poisonous volume under the name of du Garbandier.
￼that neither of these theories is directly supported by the writings of either commentator: du Garbandier is consistently virulent and defamatory while much of Kraus's work, blemished as it is by his in- accurate attainments in scholarship, is not at all unflattering to de Selby. Hatchjaw seems to take account of this discrepancy in his fare- well letter to his friend Harold Barge (the last he is known to have written) when he states his conviction that Kraus was making a considerable fortune by publishing tepid refutations of du Garbandier's broadsides. This suggestion is not without colour because, as he points out, Kraus had extremely elaborate books on the market—some containing expensive plates—within an incredibly short time of the

In such circumstances it is not easy to avoid the conclusion that both books were produced in collaboration if not written by the one hand. Certainly it is significant that the balance of the engagements between Kraus and du Garbandier was unfailingly to the disadvantage of de Selby.

Too much credit cannot be given to Hatchjaw for his immediate and heroic decision to go abroad ' to end once and for all a cancerous corruption which has become an intolerable affront to the decent in- stincts of humanity.' Bassett, in a note delivered at the quay-side at the moment of departure, wished Hatchjaw every success in his under- taking but deplored the fact that he was in the wrong ship, a sly hint that he should direct his steps to Paris rather than to Hamburg. Hatchjaw's friend Harold Barge has left an interesting record of the Barge, it is feared, was actuated more by kindly affection for Hatch- jaw than for any concern for historical accuracy when he says that the latter was ' almost unarmed -'. Probably no private traveller has ever gone abroad accompanied by a more formidable armoury and nowhere outside a museum has there been assembled a more varied or deadly collection of lethal engines. Apart from explosive chemicals and the unassembled components of several bombs, grenades and land-
￼mines, he had four army-pattern revolvers, two rook-rifles, angler's
widely remarked at the time, nobody but either Kraus or du Garban-landing gear (!), a small machine-gun, several minor firing-irons and an unusual instrument resembling at once a pistol and a shotgun, evidently made to order by a skilled gunsmith and designed to take elephant ball. Wherever he hoped to corner the shadowy Kraus, it is clear that he intended that the ' cataclysm ' should be widespread.
￼The reader who would seek a full account of the undignified fate which awaited the courageous crusader must have recourse to the page of history. Newspaper readers of the older generation will recall the sensational reports of his arrest for impersonating himself, being arraigned at the suit of a man called Olaf (var. Olafsohn) for obtain- ing credit in the name of a world-famous literary ' Gelehrter'. As was
￼￼dier could have engineered so malignant a destiny. (It is noteworthy that du Garbandier, in a reply to a suggestion of this kind made by the usually inoffensive Le Clerque, savagely denied all knowledge of Hatchjaw's whereabouts on the continent but made the peculiar state-Small profit can accrue from pursuing so peculiar a suggestion.) The facts of Hatchjaw's original incarceration are not now questioned by any variety of fates after being released. None of these can be regarded as verified fact and many are too absurd to be other than morbid con- jecture. Mainly they are: (i) that he became a convert to the Jewish faith and entered the ministry of that persuasion; (2) that he had resort to petty crime and drug-peddling and spent much of his time in jail; (3) that he was responsible for the notorious 'Munich Letter' incident involving an attempt to use de Selby as the tool of inter- national financial interests; (4) that he returned home in disguise with his reason shattered; and (5) that he was last heard of as a Hamburg that maritime cosmopolis. The definitive work on this strange man's life is, of course, that of Henderson but the following will also repay study: Bassett's Recollections, Part vii; The Man Who Sailed Away: A Memoir by H. Barge; Le Clerque's Collected Works, Vol. Ill, pp. 118-287; Peachcroft's Thoughts in a Library and the Hamburg chapter in Goddard's Great Towns.